


DELIBERATING THE SCIENCE OF MADNESS:
DSM-5 AND THE POLYTECHTONIC RHETORICAL ECONOMY OF PSYCHIATRIC NOSOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY

by

Laurance Paul Strait


A Dissertation Presented to the
FACULTY OF THE USC GRADUATE SCHOOL
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA
In Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
(COMMUNICATION)



August 2014

Copyright 2014	Laurance Paul Strait
DEDICATION



To Laura, my raison d'être, who taught me
about the fourth kind of madness.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
	Over the past seven years, I have received support, encouragement, and guidance from a great number of individuals.  Without inspiration from my family, friends, and mentors, I would have been like the man, who, “having been persuaded that competent written work comes from technical knowledge, reached the temple doors without the creative madness of the Muses; both he himself and his work were deficient, and his sober writing will be eclipsed by the art of those driven to madness” (Plato, 1903, sec. 245a, my translation).1  
	I am indebted to the members of my committee, whose guidance has made this a rewarding and thoughtful journey.  They include: Tom Goodnight (director), Randy Lake, Andy Lakoff, and Larry Gross.  In addition, I would like to thank Sandy Green, a true polymath, for his brilliant insights and helpful feedback as a member of my qualifying exam committee.  Larry Gross very generously offered his wisdom and time and, among other things, taught me the difference between a research question and a complaint.  Andy Lakoff transformed my curiosity about mental health and psychiatry into actual knowledge by directing my attention to the appropriate literature and always emphasizing the importance of conceptual rigor.  I was helped by Randy Lake to assiduously—for the most part—avoid composing sentences as terrible as this one—his unflagging, perhaps Sisyphean, efforts to improve my style is one thing which he is thanked for and, I am earnestly hopeful that a seizure will not be induced by this momentary reversion to my old habits.  I also thank him for almost single-handedly teaching the graduate rhetoric curriculum to me, which is only a slight exaggeration, as I took seven of his seminars (in some cases more than once).  He is an amazing mentor, role-model, and friend.  Finally, I must thank my advisor, Tom Goodnight, for his tutelage, patience, and insightful supervision, which proved indispensable both for this thesis and for my years of doctoral training at the University of Southern California.  Beyond guiding my work to fruition, he taught me about the joys of intellectual labor and the importance of the academic vocation.  I agree wholeheartedly with the sentiment expressed by Stephen O'Leary, and, no doubt, by countless other students of Tom's over the years, that he is unequaled in either genius or generosity.
	I profited greatly from working within the scholarly milieu engendered by the Annenberg School, and I am deeply grateful for the years of financial support and copious teaching and research opportunities afforded to me.  Imre Meszaros has been especially supportive of my efforts by making it possible for me to teach a wide variety of subjects.  I thank Anne Marie Campian for helping me navigate the university bureaucracy cheerfully and with nonpareil competence.  The faculty's broad approach to the field of communication dramatically expanded the horizon of my thoughts.  I have learned a great deal from countless conversations with other students, and I am especially indebted to the rhetoricians with whom I completed coursework: Shoko Barnes, Patrick Belanger, Beth Boser, the inimitable Omri Ceren, Ryan Gillespie, Zoltan Majdik, Steven Rafferty, Don Waisanen, and Diana Winkelman, who are all dear friends.  
	While completing my doctoral studies, I served the Trojan Debate Squad as an assistant coach and, in that capacity, worked with Gordon Stables, an incredible role-model.  His dedication to the well-being and growth of his students is remarkable, and he has nurtured a culture that ought to be the envy of every debate team.  I thank him for his years of support and valuable advice, for holding me accountable for my mistakes, and for challenging me to be a better professional.  I also learned quite a bit working with Brian McBride, whose cynical wit has brought many smiles to my face.  I thank my fellow assistants, Noah Chestnut, Liz Lauzon, Joel Lemuel, Jim Maritato, and Shawn Powers, for their example, their insight, and their solidarity.  Finally, I owe debts of gratitude to my debate students, especially Monica Do, Sean Hernandez, and Garry Padrta, for all that they have taught me, which almost certainly exceeds what I taught them.
	I am indebted to all the wonderful teachers that prepared me for doctoral studies.  Don Boileau, who advised my M.A. thesis, introduced me to the field of communication and has been a constant source of encouragement over the years.  Richard Velkley introduced me to German philosophy and inspired me to become an academic.  Steve Mancuso gave me a voice and taught me how to listen.  Deb Plummer introduced me to formal argumentation, taught me how to write and support a thesis statement, and impressed upon me the importance of primary sources.  Carolyn Dusenbury instilled in me a love of the written word, and, having no tolerance for nonsense, she inspired me to hold myself to a higher standard.  Additionally, Joseph Capizzi, Warren Decker, Les Fortune, Wayne Froman, Tim Gibson, Sr. Margarita Igriczi-Nagy, Bob Lichter, Tim Miller, Timothy Noone, and Cindy Rinehart each played a key role in my intellectual formation and collectively inspired me to become a teacher.
	I would be remiss not to acknowledge Patrick Waldinger for his perspicacity about the nature and importance of policy deliberation and his years of friendship.  I thank Michael Gales for working tirelessly to keep me relatively sane, and for helping me refine many of my raw ideas.  I also thank the many friends who, in a different way, helped me stay sane, especially Nick Barabach, Dan Cerulo, Steve D'Amico, Michael Holman, Paul Huntington, Stephen Kowalski, and Trevor Mackessy-Lloyd.  Over the past several years, they fostered my creativity while offering sage (and sometimes very spirited) advice about conflict and cooperation, data management, perspective-taking, probability, procedure, and the roles social actors play.  
	I extend a very personal thanks to my family, especially my parents Bob and Lauran, my siblings Kyle and Annabelle, and my grandmothers Carolyn and Marianne, who have supported me financially, emotionally, and spiritually.  My mother helped me directly by proofreading an early draft of Chapter 3.  John and Karen Greathouse opened up their Santa Barbara home to me during holidays, which made being three thousand miles from home endurable.  I have always been able to count on Ann and Mike Weber, who helped me at the age of ten obtain an amateur radio license and certification in CPR, providing my first formal education in communication and medicine.
	Finally, and, most crucially, I owe an eternal debt of gratitude to my partner and fellow rhetorician, Laura Alberti, for her unceasing love and support: I truly would be lost without her.  If I were to attempt to expatiate on the sundry and diversiform ways in which she enriched this project, my professional and personal development, and my life, I would run into the same problems that troubled apophatic theologians contemplating the quidditative properties of the divine essence.  Simply put, there are no words with which I could sufficiently and accurately characterize her manifold contributions.  Illa est condicio sine qua nihil sum.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION	ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS	iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS	viii
LIST OF TABLES	xiv
LIST OF FIGURES	xv
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS	xvi
ABSTRACT	xix
CHAPTER ONE: THE CONCILIAR DSM	1
	Context	9
	Excursus on L'Affaire Arius	11
	DSM-III and the Scientific Psychiatry Revolution	18
Agonistic Marking of Terms	26
Di-Agnostic or Dia-Gnostic: Esotericism in the DSM	31
	From DSM-III to DSM-5	34
	Method to My Madness	46
	Grounded Theory	48
	Rhetorical History	50
	Rhetoric of Inquiry	53
Rhetorical Subjectivity	56
Rhetorical Objectivity	56
Rhetorical Intersubjectivity	58
	Social Study of Science	58
	Materials	62
(1) Popular Media	62
(2) The “DSM-5 Development” Website	64
(3) Primary and Secondary Institutional Media	66
(4) Advertisements for Psychiatric Treatments	69
	Outline of the Study	70
Polytechtonic Rhetorical Economy	75
Rhetorical Histories of Psychosis	76
Psychosis Risk Society	78
That Commodified Supplement	81
CHAPTER TWO: POLYTECHTONIC RHETORICAL ECONOMY	82
	Rhetoric as Epistemic	87
	Memory as Epistemic Function of Rhetoric	88
	Rhetoric as Technical Art	92
	Rhetoricity of Symbolic Form	100
	Rhetoric and Institutions	106
	Rhetorical Institutionalism	107
	Social Knowledge	109
	Connecting System and Lifeworld	113
	Institutional Canon	117
	Rhetoric and Practice	125
	Ideas Market	128
	Signification Exchange	132
	Epistemic Bubbles	134
	Rhetoric as Polytechtonic Art	138
	Social Systems	141
	Rhetorical Reproduction	145
	Evolution or Revolution?	146
CHAPTER THREE: RHETORICAL HISTORIES OF PSYCHOSIS	154
	The Humoral Model of Pathology	159
	Humoral Rhetoric from Antiquity to Modernity	168
	Why did Humorism Succeed?	191
	Why did Humorism Fail?	195
	The Rise of Scientific Medicine	201
	The Ontological Interpretation	202
	Evolution of Hysteria	205
	The Physiological Interpretation	215
	Reconciliation of Ontology and Physiology	220
	Psychiatric Antecedents	225
	The Emergent Assembly of Psychiatry	230
	Inventional Visual Rhetoric	236
	Neurosis and Psychosis	248
	Dementia Praecox: Prognosis as Diagnosis	253
	Schizophrenia: A Continuum of Discontinuity	264
	Anti-Psychotics and History	274
Phenothiazines as the Discontinuous New	276
Phenothiazines as the Continuous Old	284
	Schizophrenia & Psychosis Today	289
	Conclusion	300
CHAPTER FOUR: PSYCHOSIS RISK SOCIETY	309
	Risk in Antiquity and Early Modernity	314
	Risk and Unknown Fate	316
	Risk as Dangerous Opportunity	318
	Risk and Fortune	321
	Risk as the Management of Uncertainty	324
	Psychiatric Rhetoric in a Risk Society	336
	Risks of Modernity: Degeneracy and the Rise of Hygiene	338
	Risk and Latent Danger	347
	Medicalization and Criminalization	351
Sluggish Schizophrenia	351
Pedohebephilic Disorder	364
Coercive Paraphilia	369
Parental Alienation Syndrome	381
	Risk (Factors) and Susceptibility	383
	Risk Production and Risk Society	386
	Early Intervention Research	389
	Freud's Views on Early Diagnosis	389
	Diagnostic Anti-Fatalism: Schizophreniform Disorder	393
	Early Intervention for Psychosis	396
	Theoretical Perspective of Patrick McGorry	403
	Psychosis Risk Syndrome and DSM-5	409
	Psychosis Risk Syndrome Formalized	409
	Psychosis Risk Syndrome as Representative Anecdote	412
	Terministic Screen, Interpellation, and Stigma	414
	Risks of Psychosis Risk Syndrome	417
	False Positives and the Rhetorical Ontology of Risk	418
(1) Risk Factors Interpretation	423
(2) Vulnerability Interpretation	426
(3) Prodrome or Prodromal Phase Interpretation	428
(4) 'At Risk Mental State' (ARMS) Interpretation	431
	Brief Excursus on Melancholia	434
	Changes in the DSM-5 Draft Revisions	437
	Controversy During DSM-5 Revision Process	445
	Conclusion	456
CHAPTER FIVE: THAT COMMODIFIED SUPPLEMENT	461
	Key Findings	463
	1. Rhetorical Economy of Science	463
	2. Residues of the Past Remain	464
Conceptual Cacophony	465
Kuhnian Paradigms?	468
Polytechtonic History of the Present	469
	3. Configurations of Knowledge Transcend Psychiatry	476
	4. DSM-5 Anxieties: Pharma and the Medicalization of Normality	481
	Politics of the Supplement	484
	Humoral Supplement for the Inhuman	487
	Writing as Supplement	489
	Diagnosis as Supplement	492
	Rhetorical Commodities	494
	Postpsychiatric Rhetorical Inquiry	501
REFERENCES	507

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Interpretations of Psychosis Risk Syndrome	422
Table 2: Revision History for Psychosis Risk Syndrome Criteria	438
Table 3: Final Version of Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome in DSM-5	439

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3.1: Structural relationships between the humors	161
Figure 3.2: Humoral rhetorical appeals in ‘naturopathic’ marketing	185
Figure 3.3: Brain imaging and naturopathic marketing	187
Figure 3.4: Esquirol channels Linnaeus	237
Figure 3.5: Linnaeus invoked to emphasize specificity of 'Librium'	239
Figure 3.6: SPECT images of schizophrenia	243
Figure 3.7: SPECT image of oppositional defiant disorder [ODD]	245
Figure 3.8: The Treachery of Neuroimaging	246
Figure 3.9: 'Thorazine' compared to totemic objects	278
Figure 3.10: Lifting the 'mask' of psychotic withdrawal	280
Figure 3.11: 'Thorazine' compared to colonial 'surprise bath'	282
Figure 3.12: 'Stelazine' compared to Beethoven's Fifth Symphony	285
Figure 3.13: 'Stelazine' compared to Homer's Iliad	286
Figure 3.14: Anthropomorphized disordered brain molecules	294
Figure 3.15: Illustration of apocalyptic free radical production	295
Figure 3.16: Excitotoxicity, cell death, and psychotic symptoms	296
Figure 3.17: Donepezil as molecular straitjacket	298
Figure 4.1: The risk of medication non-compliance as iceberg (reef)	327
Figure 4.2: Non-compliant schizophrenic as saboteur	359
Figure 4.3: Securing cooperation with 'Haldol'	361
Figure 4.4: Undetectable medication for paranoid patients	362

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
5-HT	5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
AAPL	American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law
ADHD	Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
APA	American Psychiatric Association
ARMS	At-Risk Mental State
BE	Bereavement Exclusion
CBD	Compulsive Buying Disorder
CBT	Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
CPR	Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
c/s/x	Consumer/Survivor/Ex-Patient Movement
DD	Dissociative Disorders
DID	Dissociative Identity Disorder
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DSM	Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
DST	Dexamethasone Suppression Test
DTI	Diffusion Tensor Imaging
ECT	Electroconvulsive Therapy
EI	Early Intervention in Psychosis
EPPIC	Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centre
FDA	Food and Drug Administration
FGA	First-Generation ('Typical') Antipsychotic
fMRI	Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
ICD	International Classification of Diseases
IED	Intermittent Explosive Disorder
KGB	Committee for State Security (Soviet Union)
L-DOPA	L-3,4-Dihydroxyphenylalanine
LSD	Lysergic Acid Diethylamide
MBD	Minimal Brain Dysfunction
MDE	Major Depressive Episode
MHMIC	Mental Health Medical-Industrial Complex
MPD	Multiple Personality Disorder
MRI	Magnetic Resonance Imaging
NAMI	National Alliance for the Mentally Ill
NIMH	National Institute of Mental Health
NMDA	N-methyl-D-aspartate (glutamate receptor)
NOS 	Not Otherwise Specified
ODD	Oppositional Defiant Disorder
OED	Oxford English Dictionary
PAH	Phenylalanine Hydroxylase
PAS	Parental Alienation Syndrome
PCP	Phencyclidine
PET	Positron Emission Tomography
PKU	Phenylketonuria
PMDD	Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder
PRS	Psychosis Risk Syndrome
PTSD	Post Traumatic Stress Disorder
RDC	Research Diagnostic Criteria
RDoCs	Research Domain Criteria
SCID	Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R
SGA	Second-Generation ('Atypical') Antipsychotic
SPECT	Single-Photon Emission Computerized Tomography
SSRI	Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor
STS	Science, Technology, & Society
SVP	Sexually Violent Predator
TCA	Tricyclic Antidepressant
TIPS	Treatment and Intervention in Psychosis Study
TMS	Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
UCLA	University of California, Los Angeles
UHR	Ultra-High Risk
US	United States
USSR	Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
WHO	World Health Organization
ABSTRACT
	This study examines the rhetorical features of psychiatric nosological controversy.  The locus of inquiry is the recent controversial revision of the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, now in its fifth edition (DSM-5).  The dissertation seeks to answer the following research question: When the field of psychiatry assembles to revise itself, how do previous rhetorical arrangements organize into new vectors, evolve, and cluster together into what becomes a new network consensus (or quasi-consensus)?  
	This dissertation contributes to debates in the social study of science and the rhetoric of inquiry about the development and evolution of scientific fields.  It contends that as psychiatric knowledge advances, discursive forms embodying old institutional logics and theoretical paradigms leave residues that retain their suasive character.  These sedimented rhetorical residues play a significant role in many of the developments and impasses in the controversies surrounding DSM-5.  Our contemporary concepts of psychosis are the result of the projection of tensions between discrete and continuous terminologies, ontological and functional interpretations of health and sickness, and psychodynamic and neurobiological descriptions of the mind into the temporal dimension.  This study argues that the inability of psychiatry to resolve a set of internal dilemmas combined with its temporizing can be understood in contemporary terms as a politics of the supplement.
	Several major DSM-5 debates are analyzed, with special focus on the controversy over psychosis risk.  Chapter 1 introduces the direct and indirect contexts of DSM-5.  Chapter 2 works out a theoretical toolkit and a model of polytechtonic rhetoric capable of appreciating the historical dynamics of interfield and public controversy.  Chapter 3 examines the rhetorical history of 'psychosis,' which requires a larger rhetorical history of psychiatric nosology.  This includes an account of the humoral model of pathology, which remains present in contemporary medical rhetoric.  Chapter 4 examines the rhetorical history of risk and the evolution of research on early interventions for psychosis to contextualize the contemporary controversy over psychosis risk syndrome.  Chapter 5 concludes the study by discussing the implications of these different lines of inquiry for an understanding of the rhetoric of psychiatry in our contemporary late modern epoch.  It argues for a reading of DSM-5 in terms of the 'politics of the supplement,' a field of contestation concerning the risks and benefits of the new technologies of the self with which we (re-)define our human nature.
Word count (excluding front matter, footnotes, and references): 109,251.  
Keywords:  Biopolitics, DSM, epistemic rhetoric, medical humanities, nosology, pharmaceutical marketing, post-structuralist institutional analysis, psychiatric diagnosis, psychosis risk syndrome, rhetorical history, rhetoric of science, risk society, scientific controversy, supplementarity.  
CHAPTER ONE: THE CONCILIAR DSM
“Some people are born mad... others achieve madness, and others have madness thrust upon them by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual [of Mental Disorders].” – Phillip Elias2  

“Science is not... a single concrete entity speaking with one authoritative voice...  The whole force of the word nevertheless depends upon a bland assumption that all scientists meet periodically in synod and there decide and publish what science believes.  Yet anyone with the slightest scientific training knows that this is very far from a possibility.” – Richard Weaver3

“Though this be madness, yet there is method in't... [of] which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered.” – Polonius4

***
	Rhetoric permeates psychiatric discourses of madness, exerting a powerful, but largely unseen, influence on the institutional development of scientific knowledge.  Persuasive deliberative appeals mediate the boundaries that divide varieties of madness into discrete disease entities and distinguish between what is mad and what is sane.  These appeals circulate through a rhetorical economy of technical discourse and social criticism within the context of public controversy.  As knowledge advances, scientists discard outdated appeals, but discursive forms embodying old institutional logics leave residues that retain their suasive character.  I argue that these sedimented rhetorical residues play a significant role in many of the developments and impasses in contemporary psychiatric nosological controversy.5  
	The locus of inquiry is the recent controversial revision of the American Psychiatric Association's (APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, now in its fifth edition (DSM-5).6   More than a decade of techno-scientific deliberation about how best to classify mental illnesses culminated in the May 2013 publication of DSM-5, “one the most anticipated events in the mental health field” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010b).  Its development drew scientists, mental health professionals, professional societies, patients, and the general public into a web of controversies sitting at the intersection of the public, technical, and personal spheres of argument (Goodnight, 1982).  These public scientific controversies “embed epistemological disputes over knowledge-claims within pragmatic contexts of public opinion formation in order to achieve intersubjective consensus on broad-based policies” (Crick & Gabriel, 2010, p. 203).  They rise to the level of “rhetorical crisis” when institutional discourse “fails to fulfill ordinary epistemological and axiological expectations” (Farrell & Goodnight, 1981, p. 272).
	As the world's largest psychiatric association, the APA regards itself as “the voice and conscience of modern psychiatry” (American Psychiatric Association, 2011a).  Since 1952, the APA has assumed responsibility for the publication and maintenance of the official formal criteria of psychiatric nosology, i.e., the classification and diagnosis of mental disorders.  The frequent references in both the popular and scientific media to the diagnostic handbook as the “Bible of psychiatry” underscore its status as an authoritative text (Geppert, 2006, p. 14).  The APA's deliberative process infuses the DSM with technical ethos, as the final text codifies the compromises reached by committees of experts after years of debating the state of scientific knowledge.  The endorsed diagnostic categories and criteria provide a frame of reference for clinicians, patients, scientists, regulators, and the members of the public to communicate about mental disorders.  
	The scope of the manual's influence extends internationally due to its integration with the International Classification of Diseases, the eleventh edition (ICD-11) of which the World Health Organization (WHO) plans to publish in 2017.  As a matter of public health, the diagnostic criteria contained in DSM-5 directly and indirectly influence the courses of treatment for hundreds of millions of people around the globe.  'Neuropsychiatric disorders' (the category in which mental illness currently is placed according to the dominant biological paradigm) are far and away the leading cause worldwide of healthy life lost due to disability, and make up more than 13% of the global burden of disease—ahead of cancer, heart disease, and HIV/AIDS (Collins et al., 2011; McGorry, 2011; World Health Organization, 2008).  Health is at “the center of Western politics and culture... Where race, creed, and class divide us, health offers the possibility of a common language” (Healy, 1997, p. 1).  A good deal of the vocabulary and grammar of that common language is institutionalized in DSM-5.  
	The creation of a common diagnostic language, however, does more than merely facilitate a certain form of medical communication.  By institutionalizing a powerful symbolic order that circulates through the discourses of public policy, scientific research, journalism, mass culture, and everyday conversation, the DSM facilitates the social distribution of knowledge about the boundaries between “abnormality and normality, disease and deviance, symptoms of illness and natural feelings, and states deserving of sympathy or of stigma” (Grob & Horwitz, 2010, p. 111).  The schemata and worldview embedded in the vocabulary and grammar of the DSM nosological universe deeply penetrate public consciousness, “[seeping]... into our art, fiction, theater, movies, language, humor, and our view of ourselves and our neighbors” (Kirk & Kutchins, 1992, p. 8).  Datta (2013) suggests that as “a cultural document whose influence transcends not only psychiatric practice but also the Western civilization from which it originates,” the DSM reflects upon and informs our human nature, and every time it is revised, it “rescripts and reimagines how we make sense of our experiences, reinterprets what thoughts, feelings and behaviors are socially sanctioned, and ultimately what it means to be human” (para. 1, my emphasis).
	Federal and state governmental bodies, along with the pharmaceutical and health insurance industries, the medical research community, and clinical mental health professionals all rely on the DSM to delimit the domain of mental illness and thereby make judgments about the medical status of deviant behavior, subjective distress, and dysfunctional communication.  Attorneys and courts look to DSM diagnostic criteria to inform their arguments and judgments about a defendant's criminal liability and mental competence to stand trial.  In short, the DSM, and the consensus it represents, is of great social importance.  Threats to that consensus are, in one way or another, threats to the institutional functioning of society.
	In order to examine the controversy surrounding DSM-5, I first lay out the context in this chapter, as this document was produced as an open successor to the closed bio-centric (yet, paradoxically, also etiologically agnostic) nosology of DSM-III/DSM-IV, which itself was an attempt to resolve the dilemmas of mind and body, prognosis and diagnosis, measurement reliability and construct validity.  Once the context is described, I will identify a range of resources for the interpretation of the document and its debate.  These resources should enable a reading in the complex contexts of institutional, systems, and lifeworld work that are difficult to unify.  This reading will pay special attention to the roles of diagnosis and the DSM in the context of risk society, late modernity, and scientific research, clinical intervention and therapy.  
	The development of DSM-5 provided an exigence that called the field of psychiatry into a reflexive conversation about its institutional identity.  The need to revise the DSM arose out of an array of historical trajectories in tension with one another.  Those involved in the contested revision process needed to make use of the terminologies, rhetorical forms, and interpreted observations that together constituted the field of psychiatry as it was, in order to advance arguments about what it should become.  To argue about revising an historical trajectory entails developing a narrative relationship with the past, a consciousness of the historically-situated nature of one's rhetorical situation.  It also requires legitimation from society at large, which necessitates the articulation of any new institutionalized categories and logics in terms compatible with society's self-understanding, ideals, anxieties, rhythms, and prevailing symbolic forms.  This dissertation therefore seeks to answer the following research question: When the field of psychiatry assembles to revise itself, how do previous rhetorical arrangements organize into new vectors, evolve, and cluster together into what becomes a new network consensus (or quasi-consensus)?  
	My major contention is that the inability of psychiatry to resolve a set of internal dilemmas combined with its temporizing can be understood in contemporary terms as a politics of the supplement: Such politics are framed by Derrida (1974) and Lyotard (1991) as ultimately residing within lacunae in the reflexive projects of the self that individuals, institutions, and society as a whole pursue.  These gaps are ineffable, defined (and thus filled) imperfectly by the supplement, and are constituted historically: “The already-there of what is lacking [fait défaut], of this unnameable De-fault [Défaut innommable] (whether one names it God or not) passes through the unlived already-there of those who once lived and bore witness” (Stiegler, 2001, p. 260).  The supplement gives rise to politics because it mediates institutional power: Foucault (2006) suggests that the “function of psychiatric knowledge” is “to give the psychiatrist's power a particular stamp, to give it an additional, supplementary distinction; in other words, the psychiatrist's knowledge is one of the components by which the disciplinary apparatus organizes the surplus-power of reality around madness” (p. 233).  
	The DSM supplements what is lacking in psychiatry's ability to produce knowledge relative to other fields of medicine.  It consists of psychiatric diagnoses, which supplement imperfections in the individual, attempting to correct the disparity between society's ideal healthy subject and a patient's lived experience and capacity to function.  These diagnoses signify the biological imperfections that psychopharmacological medications supplement.  Revisions in diagnostic practice supplement the adverse consequences of these material interventions.  And so on:
Everything is supplementary, and yet no supplement can stand in general for what is supplemented and what supplements... Only the program—supplementarity—can give the necessity, after the event [après-coup], of the absolute past and the absolute future; only the program can both compel and interrupt belief just as it can both compel and forbid the calculation of belief.  This “both” has a history, it is never given except in the singularity of epochs that are traced by the history of supplementary specificities, notably those of contemporary technology.  (Stiegler, 2001, p. 261)
In other words, the rhetoricity of any formulation of the supplement, the degree to which it facilitates efforts to compel or interrupt belief (or its calculation), is situated in a history that leaves its trace in the discursive residues of past appeals that find re-use in the present.
	So, before foregrounding my discussion of DSM-5 against the historical backdrop of DSM-III, I shall first examine another important historical context: an ancient religious synod in which a field of experts set out to revise its supplemental categories.  The leading social institution of the day charged with managing and mediating technologies of the self required a standardized and reliable text deriving from consensus and directed toward maintaining consensus.  I shall move from this indirect context to the direct context of DSM-III.  I then discuss the methodological presuppositions that guide this study.  
	At the end of this chapter, I provide an outline of the study, which I preview now.  The second chapter takes up the the question of the relationship between rhetoric and knowledge.  There, I argue that a rhetorical economy provides structure to scientific fields, enabling their growth and reproduction.  As the old means of producing meaning accumulate, knowledge workers reassemble them into hybrid rhetorical forms, maintaining a continuity with the past amidst the discontinuous present.  This is less a study of the "hidden rhetorics in knowledge claims" than of those that are out in the open, in marketing appeals and in public debate about the benefits and risks of legitimating certain scientific theories (Ceccarelli, 2001, p. 168).  The third and fourth chapters examine the rhetorical development of two objects of knowledge, psychosis and risk, that inform the controversy over psychosis risk syndrome, which I argue is a “representative anecdote” of both DSM-5 and of late modernity (Burke, 1969a, p. 59).  The final chapter summarizes the findings and implications for the politics of the supplement, discusses limitations of this study, and suggests future lines of inquiry that might supplement what this study lacks.
Context
	Though DSM-5 is firmly anchored in the world of late modernity, in recognition of the “futurity of the past,” I shall pursue a brief excursus on an institutional crisis that rocked the world of late antiquity (Habermas, 1994, p. 66).  It may seem peculiar to begin a study of a contemporary psychiatric controversy with an analogy to a pre-modern religious debate.  Psychiatry today has more in common with yesterday's Christianity than might be apparent at first glance – just as priests exorcised demons, heard confessions, and dispensed edible substances with soul-healing properties, psychiatrists treat psychosis, provide psychotherapy (though this is becoming increasingly rare), and prescribe psychoactive medication.  In a society characterized by an ever-increasing preoccupation with health, psychiatry plays a similar role as Christianity played in a society concerned with salvation.  This may help to explain why commentators so often refer to the DSM as the 'Bible of psychiatry.'  Direct and indirect references to religious concepts, terms, and symbols fill the network of discourse produced by psychiatrists about psychiatry.  For example, Geppert (2006) cites “stigma research [indicating] that to be labeled as an 'anorexic' or a 'schizophrenic' may not be all that far from being branded a sinner or damned in terms of its detrimental effect on self-image and future possibilities” (para. 9).  I shall develop the broader analogy between psychiatry and Christianity in greater detail throughout the dissertation, beginning with the specific historical analogy in this section that provides important context about the revision process that lead to DSM-III.
	At certain times in history, an institutional controversy among specialists about a highly technical matter manages to set off a society-wide conversation, the topic of which seems somehow to transcend its own scope.  By studying these controversies, it is possible to gain insight about the historical episteme in which they occur.  Each of these controversies provides society a means to reflect upon its understanding of human nature, society, and communication.  Contemporary psychiatric nosology and ancient dogmatic theology overlap barely at all, and yet they both provoked significant controversies characterized by the same level of vehemence and intensity.  I begin with this analogy, therefore, to call attention to the possibility that the DSM-5 controversy can tell us something more general about the contemporary nature of humanity and the ongoing development of multiple modernities.
Excursus on L'Affaire Arius
	In the first quarter of the fourth century of the Common Era, a grave doctrinal dispute known to historians as the Arian crisis threatened to tear Christianity in half.7  The issues debated include the relationship between God the Father and Jesus, the validity of baptisms performed by heretics, the status of those Christians who had renounced their faith in the face of torture and death, and the proper date for the celebration of Easter.  At stake was the institutional legitimation of the Universal Church, which was in ascendancy in the Roman Empire due to the support it had recently drawn from the emperor.  Two factions, the Arians and the Homoousians, engaged in a heated theological conflict.  The Arians were associated with a presbyter named Arius who emphasized the difference between God the Father and Jesus Christ.  The Homoousians, whose name derives from the Greek homos (????), meaning 'same,' and ousia (?????), meaning 'essence' or 'being,' insisted that the Father and the Son were consubstantial.  At the request of Emperor Constantine I, approximately 300 bishops (each accompanied by several priests and deacons) converged upon a small city in Asia Minor (modern day Turkey) in the summer of 325 to convene the First Council of Nicaea (Rubenstein, 1999).
	Constantine was not driven by a particular theological agenda; indeed, modern historians (e.g., Williams, 1995) have increasingly emphasized the importance of his non-theological political and institutional motives.  Rather, he simply wanted the bishops to determine which side was correct and then agree on a consistent set of beliefs so that there would be unity.  In a letter to Alexander, the first Archbishop of Constantinople, Constantine suggested that disunity was a threat to public mental health:
Indeed, when an intolerable madness had seized the whole of Africa because of those who dared with ill-considered frivolity to split the worship of the population into various factions, and when I personally desired to put right this disease, the only cure sufficient for the affair that I could think of was that, after I destroyed the common enemy of the whole world, who had set his own unlawful will against your holy synods, I might send some of you to help towards the reconciliation of those at variance with each other. (Eusebius, 1999, sec. 2.66)8
For the first time in the history of the Church,9 an assembly of bishops representing all of Christendom, working in cooperation with temporal authorities, came together to form a consensus about the critical theological issues of the day and, after a long debate, produced a standardized doctrinal creed backed by both the official leaders of Christianity and the state (Ehrman, 2014; Rubenstein, 1999).
	In the decades that followed, the council seemed to provoke as many questions as it resolved.  As the council had been silent about the Holy Spirit, theologians were not yet able to arrive at a comprehensive doctrine of the Trinity.  Leaving it as an open question, teams of theologians working with the Nicene terminology and schemata produced several lines of research that appeared to be productive, but in fact were later determined to be heretical and, thus, epistemic dead-ends, e.g., the Homoiousian10 school that taught that the Son is of a 'similar substance' to the Father, or the Homoian school that taught that the Son and Father are 'similar in all things,' without taking a stance about the divine essence (Heather & Matthews, 1991).  
	Christianity had long been challenged by external critics (both Jewish and pagan), but the very public denunciations of recognized church authorities by other recognized church authorities that became common during this period signified a novel historical development.  In the process, what was once in the domain of expert theologians (and before that, strictly in the personal sphere of private faith) became a public matter, as “debates on Christian dogma [were drawn] out of the seclusion of churches and made... a regular topic of discussion in the imperial consistory, in the salons and in the marketplace” (Sághy, 1999, p. 151).  Gregory of Nyssa gives us a sense of how public (and, in his opinion, insane) this controversy was in Constantinople in the fourth century:  
All the city is full of the controversy—in the public squares, the markets, the streets, and the alleys; among clothing merchants, money-changers, and vendors of food and drink.  If you ask someone for change, he philosophizes to you about the begotten and the unbegotten.  If you ask about the price of bread, the baker replies: “The Father is greater, and the Son subordinate.”  Or if you ask: “Is the bath serviceable?”, the attendant says that the Son was made out of nothing.  I do not know by what name one should call this malady, whether it be frenzy, or madness, or some evil epidemic of this sort, which causes such a derangement of reason.11 (Gregory of Nyssa, 1863, sec. 557b, my translation)
Participants in this public theological controversy even became reflexively aware of what we now might call 'conflicts of interest,' as various theological parties challenged the propriety of their opponents' involvement one way or another with the secular authorities.  
	All of this eventually was settled in 381 in the First Council of Constantinople (Hanson, 1988; Rubenstein, 1999).  This, the second ecumenical council, completed the work Constantine initiated more than 50 years earlier, and produced a set of decrees by which Nicene Christianity was adopted as the official religion of the Roman Empire, at which point the ascendance of catholic orthodoxy became official.  Genuine advancements in the development of Christian doctrine followed, as dogmatic theologians were able to move on from the basic Trinitarian doctrine to pursue higher Christological questions (Sheldon, 1895).  More than 1500 years later, the doctrinal canons pronounced in Nicaea and Constantinople still provide a common language and a set of key terms that frame the way in which Christians profess their faith and discuss matters of religious doctrine.  The recent national conversation about whether Mitt Romney (as a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, which does not accept the traditional doctrine of the Trinity) is a “real Christian” testifies to the enduring historical significance of these two ancient ecumenical councils (Debevec, 2011).
	What is entailed in the claim that Jesus Christ is, to use the words of the Nicene Creed, “begotten, not made, one in being with the Father,” and what difference would it make instead to claim that, for example, Jesus Christ was at one point created?  In the fourth century, this was more than a mere matter of life or death – the implications were sufficiently profound to attract the attention of the Emperor of the (known) world.  Society has always rested on certain shared taken-for-granted but unprovable assumptions. In the ancient world, they included humanity's epistemic capacity to know with confidence certain things about the nature of God and the relationship between God and humanity.  These assumptions form the hidden backbone of the lifeworld, which “for us who wakingly live in it, is always already there, existing in advance for us, the 'ground' of all praxis whether theoretical or extratheoretical” (Husserl, 1970, p. 142).  Though the questions taken up in the two ecumenical councils of the fourth century barely seem meaningful as questions today, they were able to serve as a focal point for the configuration of important political, economic, and  institutional relationships, because their open and unresolved status threatened to tear the fabric of the lifeworld.  Failure to resolve the Arian controversy meant facing an existential crisis, “the prospect of being overwhelmed by anxieties that reach to the very roots of [their] coherent sense of 'being in the world' [and]... the frameworks of existence” (Giddens, 1991, p. 37).  
	In light of Durkheim's (2001) famous insight that 'God' signifies a society's apotheosized projection of itself, it becomes perhaps easier to see some of the sociological and epistemic stakes entailed in a premodern controversy about the doctrine of the Trinity, which posits that God consists of three persons. The first of these is associated with “all that is seen and unseen,” the external objective world (English Language Liturgical Commission, 1997, l. 4).  The second is a human subject who, personifying language, is known as “the Word,” and accordingly, “through him all things were made” (l. 12). The third personifies the relationship between the first two (that is, between the object world and the subject world) while at the same time, having “spoken through the prophets” (l. 28), represents the intersubjective world by mediating the relationship between God (society) and humanity (also society).12  In this way, I contend, the Arian crisis precipitated a society-wide discussion about itself, the nature of identity, subject-object relations, and intersubjectivity that touched every major institution of the known world.  Then, as now, the ontological security of the lifeworld depends upon assumptions about the nature and stability of the objective world, the subjective self, the relationship between subject and object, and intersubjective relationships.  Descartes's (1998) project of radical doubt later embedded these assumptions in the self-certain, self-identical, rational, and sovereign subject of early modernity.  Each of these attributes has been rendered problematic in our current epoch of late modernity, a “post-traditional order... [that] institutionalizes the principle of radical doubt” (Giddens, 1991, pp. 2–3).  Just as religion was tasked with these problems in late antiquity, psychiatry has been tasked with them today.
DSM-III and the Scientific Psychiatry Revolution
	Many of the themes and events surrounding the First Council of Nicaea reappeared in the second half of the twentieth century, as psychiatry faced a looming institutional legitimation crisis.  Criticisms of orthodox psychiatry became increasingly salient in the public sphere, bringing the cultural credibility of psychiatric diagnosis into question.  One of the most outspoken critics was the psychiatrist Thomas Szasz, who had achieved some notoriety among his physician peers for arguing that mental disorders only are medical illnesses in a metaphorical sense; mental illness, he provocatively maintained, is a “myth whose function it is to disguise and thus render more palatable the bitter pill of moral conflicts in human relations” (Szasz, 1960, p. 118).  Critical sociologists, particularly those associated with symbolic interactionism, social constructionism, and related theoretical perspectives, began producing critiques of psychiatry in which they suggested that mental illness serves as a conceptual apparatus for managing social deviance (Foucault, 2001; Scheff, 1966; S. P. Spitzer & Denzin, 1968).  These critiques undermined the institutional self-identity of psychiatry as a medical discipline, an identity that was “historically weak and vulnerable,” yet served as the basis for an institutional order in which psychiatry, vis-à-vis other mental health professions like clinical psychology and clinical social work, was preeminent (Kirk & Kutchins, 1992, p. 21).  
	The construct validity of mental disorders as medical illnesses was further challenged when several meetings of the APA were disrupted by protesters enraged by the inclusion of homosexuality as a mental illness in DSM-II.  Further calling into question the scientific reliability of psychiatric diagnosis, the scandalous Rosenhan experiment demonstrated that twelve psychiatric hospitals were incapable of distinguishing between real and fake patients (Rosenhan, 1973).  More than just a scientific problem, the use of unreliable diagnoses constituted “morally questionable labeling that stigmatized patients, resulting in negative overall effects” (Wilson & Skodol, 1994, p. 341).  Regulatory changes governing the practice of randomized clinical trials amplified the institutional relevance of the problem of reliability, which led to the development of specific diagnostic criteria (the Research Diagnostic Criteria [RDC]) written in language stripped of psychodynamic etiology (Healy, 1997; R. L. Spitzer, Endicott, & Robins, 1978).
	In 1974, Robert Spitzer was chosen to chair a committee that would revise DSM-II.  He had been involved in the production of DSM-II, albeit in a trivial role.  As Spitzer tells it, Ernest Gruenberg, chair of the APA's Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics, approached him in 1967 (the year before the APA published DSM-II) and asked: “We're finishing work on DSM-II and we need somebody to take notes at committee meetings and maybe help in editing some of the stuff, would you be interested?” (R. L. Spitzer, 2000, p. 416).13  A chance conversation with an activist led to his organization of a symposium about homosexuality at the the APA's 1973 annual conference.  That same year, Judd Marmar, who had publicly come out against pathologizing homosexuality, became president of the APA.  Marmar knew of Spitzer from his involvement with the symposium.  While Spitzer “had some reputation as a researcher, ...I think he mainly saw me as somebody who knew the DSM committee stuff.  You have to realize also that at that time it wasn't regarded as that important a job” (p. 418).  In 1974, Spitzer's committee officially declassified homosexuality as a mental disorder (replacing it with 'sexual orientation disturbance,' which was in turn replaced by 'ego-dystonic sexual orientation' in DSM-III and 'sexual disorder not otherwise specified' in DSM-IV), and in the same year, the APA convened its first ecumenical council of sorts: the DSM-III Task Force.  
	Two competing factions—the psychoanalytic Freudians and the biological neo-Kraepelinians—differed both in the way they conceived of mental illness and in the technical vocabularies with which they each classified and diagnosed mental disorders.  As the psychodynamic symbolic universe declined, the biomedical perspective ascended and increasingly dominated the institutional order that structured the everyday world of psychiatric practice.  In line with Berger and Luckmann's observation that the “appearance of an alternative symbolic universe poses a threat because its very existence demonstrates empirically that one's own universe is less than inevitable,” this conflict called attention to the arbitrary nature of many psychiatric concepts, about which Szasz famously noted: “If you talk to God, you are praying; if God talks to you, you have schizophrenia. If the dead talk to you, you are a spiritualist; if you talk to the dead, you are a schizophrenic” (Berger & Luckmann, 1966, p. 108; Szasz, 1973, p. 113).  The APA explicitly recognized the RDC in 1980 with the publication of DSM-III, which “was to be a kind of diagnostic machine, the reliable performance of which would liberate psychiatry from the idiosyncrasies of subjective judgment” (Lakoff, 2000, p. 159).  
	Those involved frequently characterized the sweeping changes wrought by DSM-III in terms of Enlightenment-era political insurrection, the overthrow of psychiatry's psychodynamic Ancien Régime.  DSM-III was not necessarily the subversive agent—that honor went to 'science' itself—but “perhaps more than any other single event, the publication of DSM-III demonstrated that American Psychiatry had undergone a revolution” (Maxmen, 1985, p. 35).  For the new psychiatric regime, DSM-III functioned as a “charter document,” a text that
establishes an organizing framework that specifies what is significant and draws people's attention to certain rules and relationships.  In other words, the charter defines as authoritative certain ways of seeing and deflects attention from other ways.  It thus stabilizes a particular reality and sets the terms for future discussion.  DSM-III is a charter document in psychiatry, and the particular reality that it stabilizes is the biomedical conceptual model of mental illness. (McCarthey, 1991, p. 358).
As the instrument by which “the ascendance of scientific psychiatry became official,” DSM-III radically divorced theory from praxis, for “the old psychiatry derives from theory, the new psychiatry from fact” (Maxmen, 1985, pp. 35, 31, my emphasis).  
	What was the nature of this 'new psychiatry'?  Textually, DSM-III was a monumental change from DSM-II.  It was 494 pages long, with 265 diagnostic categories, and was later revised in 1987 as the DSM-III-R to be 567 pages long with 292 diagnoses.  But changes to specific diagnoses, on their own or in the aggregate, were not what made DSM-III revolutionary.  For that, we must look to the social drama in which the production of DSM-III served as the central act and examine the motives of its agents.
	Robert Spitzer, whose past involvement in the revision of DSM-II secured the institutional ethos of tradition, led the DSM-III task force, which had a few overarching goals.  The first was to standardize diagnostic practices with other countries, as recent evidence showed marked differences in diagnostic practices between the United States and Europe, which not only suggested poor reliability, but also interfered with the international regulatory process through which a pharmaceutical company can bring drugs to the market (Gurland et al., 1970).  For this, criteria were taken from the RDC—which Spitzer co-authored—and the Feigner Criteria, and developed more by consensus during meetings of the committee (Lakoff, 2005).  These criteria left little room for creative interpretation, which had more or less served as the central diagnostic modus operandi prior to DSM-III.  The second was to remove symptoms and disorders that performed an interpretive function with respect to etiology and pathogenesis, e.g., “depressive neurosis,” which is the result of “an excessive reaction of depression due to an internal conflict or to an identifiable event such as the loss of a love object or cherished possession” (American Psychiatric Association, 1968, p. 40).  Instead, all listed symptoms are descriptive, in colloquial English language, of behavior or feelings expressed by the patient.  
	While this latter feature is frequently cited as an innovation of DSM-III, the framers of DSM-II believed that they had been guided by that same principle:  “The Committee accepted the fact that different names for the same thing imply different attitudes and concepts.  It has, however, tried to avoid terms which carry with them implications regarding either the nature of a disorder or its causes,” although they were “explicit about causal assumptions when they are integral to a diagnostic concept” (American Psychiatric Association, 1968, p. viii).  The framers of DSM-III would have preferred to eliminate all diagnostic concepts tied to essential causal assumptions, but they did retain one: “300.11 Conversion Disorder (or Hysterical Neurosis, Conversion Type),” the definition of which “is unique in this classification in that it implies specific mechanisms to account for the disturbance” (American Psychiatric Association, 1987, p. 257).  The real difference between the way the two manuals implemented this ideal is that the framers of DSM-III had an ulterior motive: a desire to promote a biomedical approach by marginalizing psychodynamic nosology.  In contrast, when dealing with “diagnostic categories about which there is current controversy concerning the disorder's nature or cause,” the framers of DSM-II “attempted to select terms which it thought would least bind the judgment of the user,” not trying “to reconcile [conflicting] views but rather to find terms which could be used to label the disorders about which they wished to be able to debate” (American Psychiatric Association, 1968, pp. viii–ix).
	DSM-III endorsed an approach to psychiatric nosology grounded in a biomedical model, in which mental illnesses were understood to be
real, generic entities which cause distress or impairment in functioning.  Further, there is an implication of underlying behavioral, psychological, or biological dysfunction; that is, the disturbance is not just in the relationship between the individual and society. (McCarthey, 1991, p. 361)
This was more than just a new list of disorders to diagnose.  It entailed an institutional logic of practices operating according to a nosological rationality common to other fields of medicine but new to psychiatry.  One of the neo-Kraepelinian reformers, Samuel Guze, described (2000) the basic premise and implications of this new rationality:
We insisted that psychiatry would make the greatest progress by being viewed as a medical discipline.  This viewpoint has all kinds of implications as to how patients are thought about and approached.  In addition, as in the rest of medicine, research offered the only hope for the future of our field and it had to include clinical studies, basic laboratory work and basic epidemiological work.  Our basic outlook on psychoanalysis was that there appeared to be no way to test it and there were such limited data to support it. (pp. 398-399)
A psychiatrist employing the nosological rationality endorsed in DSM-III classifies a patient by listing his or her basic symptoms, most of which will be non-specific, and then gives a diagnosis based on their clustering pattern.  DSM-III-R reinforced this mode of practice by promulgating the 'Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R' (SCID), an instrument for administering “a clinical assessment procedure that would not only be linked to DSM-III but would incorporate several features not present in previous clinical diagnostic instruments” (R. L. Spitzer, Williams, Gibbon, & First, 1992, p. 624).  
	As Guze's remark about psychoanalysis suggests, the biomedical nosological rationality starkly contrasted with psychodynamic nosological rationality, according to which “each mentally ill patient is seen as an individual whose symptoms have meaning particular to him or her,” and which are then interpreted according to the “constructs of intrapsychic workings and theories of etiology developed by Freud, Adler, or Jung” (McCarthey, 1991, pp. 361–362).  Quite often, the psychoanalyst sees the patient's symptoms as symbolic artifacts of conflict within his or her unconscious mind.  The two rationalities appear to have certain terms and concepts in common, but they are in fact “incommensurable epistemic systems” (Lakoff, 2005, p. 164).  
Agonistic Marking of Terms
	The framers of DSM-III marginalized psychoanalytic rationality by targeting its key terms.  Considerable controversy surrounded the term 'neurosis.'  I discuss its relationship to 'psychosis' extensively in Chapter 3.  For now, it is enough to note that their relative meaning, especially in the nineteenth century, was constantly in flux, as was which of the two terms was preferred, or 'unmarked.'  Chandler explains the semiotic concept of markedness:
The unmarked form is typically dominant (e.g., statistically within a text or corpus) and therefore seems to be neutral, normal, and natural.  It is thus transparent – drawing no attention to its invisibly privileged status, while the deviance of the marked form is salient... Unmarked-marked may thus be read as norm-deviation. (Chandler, 2002, p. 112)
By the time DSM-III was in production, 'neurosis' had become the marked term.  While it remained a key term in psychoanalytic theory, proponents of biological psychiatry believed that it was too vague and unscientific (Bayer & Spitzer, 1985).  Early drafts of DSM-III lacked the word altogether, resulting in a political backlash from the newly marginalized psychoanalytically oriented psychiatrists.  
	The conflict was not resolved through recourse to scientific data.  Instead, as historian of psychiatry Hannah Decker tells it, what happened was more a political power struggle between metaphorically warring parties than a collaborative scientific research endeavor:
Spitzer's... plan was to propose a “neurotic peace treaty” ...to deal with the array of challenges on the neurosis issue.  The treaty was a complex three-part measure that would involve changes and additions to the classification (Axis I and II), the Introduction, and the Glossary of Technical Terms...  To complicate his negotiations further, Spitzer... faced... rebellion from the Task Force.  He had tried to convince them that his “neurotic peace treaty” was not capitulation or undoing vital progress, but not all were persuaded...  In a memo to the entire Task Force, [Donald] Klein accused Spitzer of “usurping the authority of the task force” …[and] charged that Spitzer was weakening in the face of those who wanted a psychoanalytic influence in DSM-III.  Those arguing for a descriptive treatment of the neuroses in reality wanted “the term reinserted because they wish a covert affirmation of their psychogenic hypotheses.”  This is “all too painfully obvious,” Klein went on.  He accused Spitzer of engaging in a political maneuver that was “unworthy of the scientists who are attempting to advance our field via classification and reliable definition.”  (Decker, 2013, pp. 283–284)
This conflict was apparently so significant that there was concern over whether the APA Board of Trustees would approve the manual.  
	Chandler's (2002) analysis of marked terms suggests that if the term 'neurosis' could not be “simply subsumed,” then it would be “foregrounded – presented as different; it is out of the ordinary – an extraordinary deviational special case which is something other than the standard or default form of the unmarked term” (p. 112). In the end, that is precisely what occurred: 'Neurosis' was kept in a few instances of diagnostic special pleading, sometimes following the word 'disorder,' and always in parentheses, e.g., “300.40  Dysthymia (or Depressive Neurosis),” a disorder created for this purpose and retained in DSM-III-R and DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1987, p. 230).  In most other diagnoses in which 'neurosis' had appeared in DSM-III, the marked term vanished without a whimper.  In DSM-5, the term 'dysthymia' was marked in just the same manner as the discarded term 'neurosis' had been: Diagnosis 300.4 is now called “Persistent Depressive Disorder (Dysthymia)” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 168).  
	At the time, in a memo outlining his proposal to add the marked terms 'neurotic,' 'neurosis,' and 'psychoneurosis' in various places in the text, Spitzer claimed that it was “not merely a compromise, but is, in fact, preferable to the previous approach taken by the Task Force toward this very difficult problem” (as cited in Decker, 2013, p. 284).  Years later, however, as Spitzer explained to David Healy in an interview, he actually thought those terms were meaningless and his only objective was to pacify his opponents:
A lot of what I had to do was diplomacy.  I had to meet with these people.  I came up with all kinds of ways of muting their concerns... But eventually all these things meant nothing.  When DSM-III-R came out, we dropped the parentheses.  Can you imagine that somebody would now say obsessive-compulsive neurosis?  It would just be absurd.  I think history has proven what we did. (R. L. Spitzer, 2000, p. 424)
Spitzer's conclusion relies on the metonymic substitution of effect for cause in the reduction of the emergence of scientific consensus to 'history,' and it implies that the marginalization of analytic perspectives in DSM-III was more of a falsifiable prediction than a determinant of future psychiatric practice (Lanham, 1991; Vickers, 1988).  By the same rhetorical topic, petitio principii, one might argue that history has proven that the Church made wise decisions about which books belong in the New Testament canon—after all, one can find all of them in the Bible!  Could anyone imagine that somebody would now talk about the Apocryphon of James in a sermon?
	It should be clear by now that the DSM is not the collected results of impersonal processes of neutrally testing claims against reality.  The militaristic metaphors psychiatrists sometimes use to characterize the struggles surrounding the DSM suggest that reality is tested only within the context of a discursive field of battle, which, once captured, must be defended by an ever-expanding epistemic 'military'-industrial complex:
Fatefully, perhaps, the victors... withdrew, leaving the defeated analysts to reposition themselves.  Some of the analysts' efforts to regroup led to their containment behind the sanctions of evidence based medicine, legal precedents, protocols, and guidelines, which established substantial “no fly” zones. (Healy, 1999, p. 949)
Having won the battle, the victors built institutional battlements on the conquered land.  I suggest that the DSM is an agonistic instrument that institutionalizes both a domain of discourse and a set of motives – in other words, “an act or body of acts... done by agents... and designed (purpose) to serve as a motivational ground (scene) of subsequent actions, it being thus an instrument (agency) for the shaping of human relations” (Burke, 1969a, p. 341, emphasis in the original).  
Di-Agnostic or Dia-Gnostic: Esotericism in the DSM
	DSM-III eliminated the problem of diagnostic unreliability, which had become “symbolic of the profession's self-doubts and of its vulnerability to public and scientific criticism,” through a process of mystification that transformed the unreliable categories and the statistics with which their reliability was measured (Kirk & Kutchins, 1992, p. 13).  Diagnostic unreliability, which as a cultural problem posed a potential institutional legitimation crisis, was by DSM-III
transformed from a seriously threatening conceptual and practical problem into a technical problem, best left to experts who promised technical solutions.  Redefined as a technical problem, diagnostic reliability lost its simple, intuitive meaning to practitioners and became, in the hands of a few teams of research psychiatrists, complex and mystified. (p. 14)
Mystification is not unusual in scientific discourse, but nosological discourse, because of the nature of its subject-matter, needs to be accessible to lay audiences, or at least appear to be accessible.  
	Psychiatric nosological discourse simultaneously attracts and excludes public participation, as was noted by Walter Lippmann in an essay on lay reactions to Freud:
It is clear why we who are laymen [sic] cannot remain entirely passive about Freud... We ourselves are the subject matter of his science, and in the most intimate and drastic way.  The structure of matter can be left to objective analysis, but these researches of Freud challenge the very essence of what we call ourselves.  They involve the sources of our character, they carry analysis deeper into the soul of man [sic] than analysis has ever been carried before... We live in a world where knowledge is becoming more and more highly specialized, and as laymen [sic] we cannot hope to have the equipment for adequate judgment... We are called on to make decisions we are not trained to make.  This is almost the central problem in modern intellectual life. (Lippmann, 1970, pp. 298–300, emphasis in original)
Georges Clemenceau's famous (though perhaps apocryphal) dictum about war being too important of a matter to leave to the generals seems especially apt here.14  We, all of us, who have human natures, are stakeholders in any debate about psychiatric nosological discourse.  
	 The neo-Kraepelinian nosological orientation of DSM-III satisfied this complex rhetorical exigence.  It institutionalized a set of terms that “permitted communication between experts and... [practitioners], while at the same time allowing the [practitioner] to communicate with the public,” and succeeded in holding the field together
by virtue of combining the right measure of simplicity and ambiguity...  [The new nosological terms] succinctly conveyed a meaning that people thought they could grasp but that in actual fact was like a Rorschach test, something into which different groups could read whatever meaning they wished to see. (Healy, 1997, p. 160)
The theoretical development of psychiatry as a scientific field requires a set of terms that can simplify a very complex matrix of phenomena without straightforwardly resulting in error or nonsense.  They must be rigid enough to allow for measurements that are scientifically meaningful and reliable, yet flexible enough to survive the new meanings developed through the processes of scientific discovery and pharmaceutical marketing.  
	An authoritative but mysterious text lures its audience in, and acquires new layers of mystification as that audience presses the text to disclose its secrets, for a “sacred text... never completely yields up its secrets.  The shadows may be pushed back, but they are never finally dissipated, for every revelation creates another mystery” (Black, 1992, p. 55).  This is true particularly for texts that present themselves as accessible, both to the lay public and to scientists.  Such epistemic openness widens both apparent knowledge and mystery, and grants further authority to the institution that claims expertise at interpreting the text's secrets:
Once a text is credited with high authority it is studied intensely; once it is so studied it acquires mystery or secrecy.  The tradition undergoes many transformations, but is continuous; revivals of learning did not destroy but fostered secrecy... The belief that a text might be an open proclamation, available to all, coexisted comfortably with the belief that it was a repository of secrets.  And this quality of sacred books is inherited by counterparts in the secular canon.  Shakespeare is an inexhaustible source of occult reading... yet at the same time he is believed to speak plainly, about most of human life, to any literate layman.  Like the scriptures, he is open to all, but at the same time so dark that special training, organized by an institution of considerable size, is required for his interpretation. (Kermode, 1979, p. 144)
Much like Shakespeare's corpus, the DSM-III nosology managed to combine plain language about everyday human experiences, while mystifying reliability problems and also facilitating esoteric scientific research.
From DSM-III to DSM-5
	The model of psychopathology established in 1980 with the publication of DSM-III maintains its institutional hegemony to this day.  When “certain domains of discourse are institutionalized, ...discursive conversations will be initiated... [that] become a systematically relevant mechanism of learning for a given society” (Habermas, 1973, p. 25).  As an institutional technology for the regulation of a domain of discourse, DSM provides a terministic screen that reveals some objects while concealing others.  Burke (1969a) insisted that humanity is constantly searching for “vocabularies that will be faithful reflections of reality.  To this end, they must develop vocabularies that are selections of reality.  And any selection must, in certain circumstances, function as a deflection of reality” (Burke, 1969a, p. 5).  No longer primarily thought of as maladaptive psychological processes, mental disorders have been transformed into specific medical disease entities that are “defined and legitimated in terms of characteristic somatic mechanisms” (Rosenberg, 2006, p. 407).  These disorders are illnesses of the brain, rather than the mind.
	Since DSM-III, psychiatric diagnostic variables are almost exclusively categorical, and the function of diagnosis is to identify the presence or absence of a specific mental disorder, determined by whether the patient exhibits a minimum number of symptoms.  Under this system, for example, if and only if a patient displays five or more symptoms of depression over a two-week period that cannot be explained by the loss of a loved one,15 he or she suffers from major depressive disorder. As with diseases like lung cancer or tuberculosis, there is understood to be a sharp division between the healthy and the sick.  In contrast, a dimensional model of psychopathology would treat mental disorders as continuous variables.  Rather than identifying whether the patient suffers from a disorder, the diagnostician determines the degree to which one suffers, under the assumption that the symptoms of the mental disorder in question are continuously distributed throughout the general population.  
	Although a categorical nosology was useful in providing further contrast with the more dimensional psychodynamic nosology, there is nothing inherent about the biomedical model that calls for a categorical approach.  The categorical approach does resemble the way in which most non-psychiatric diseases, e.g., lung cancer or tuberculosis, are classified (there are exceptions, however, like high blood pressure).  But those diagnostic categories are much more mutually exclusive and grounded in physiology than psychiatric categories.  It seems that the primary reason for adopting the categorical approach was less about science than political economy.  Among the neo-Kraepelinians involved in the DSM-III Task Force, Samuel Guze favored excluding many problematic categories, replacing them with a “label that would indicate what the diagnostic problem was... [which] would put us on a stronger scientific basis.”  His proposal was not embraced:
[The other members of the task force] said we have enough trouble getting the legitimacy of psychiatric problems accepted by our colleagues, insurance companies and other agencies. 'If we do what you're proposing, which makes sense to us scientifically, we think that not only will we weaken what we are trying to do but we will give the insurance companies an excuse not to pay us.' ...I bring up this story because you have to recognize that any classification system is of the moment.  If you look at the rest of medicine, diagnostic systems are always being sharpened, certain things are being lumped together, certain things are being pulled apart... I have always taken the position that when we understand everything about them, some psychiatric disorders will end up as distinct qualitatively different conditions and others will be on some sort of continuum. (Guze, 2000, p. 407)
When DSM-5 was conceived, one hope was that it would produce a nosology similar to what Guze had described, a hybrid of categorical and dimensional constructs, due to the prevailing belief that “reliance on categorical diagnoses in past research studies may be a major factor in how little we yet know of the causes and cures of mental disorders” (Kraemer, Shrout, & Rubio-Stipec, 2007, p. 263).
	Advocates of dimensional constructs appeal more to the failures of psychiatric research using categorical constructs than to any positive evidence in support of dimensional validity.  Kupfer, First, and Regier (2002) argue that the search for specific laboratory markers that could identify any of the DSM-defined disorders has been fruitless.  To the contrary:
Epidemiologic and clinical studies have shown extremely high rates of comorbidities among the disorders, undermining the hypothesis that the syndromes represent distinct etiologies... [as well as] a high degree of short-term diagnostic instability for many disorders.... Lack of treatment specificity is the rule rather than the exception. (p. xvii).
Making a similar point, Rounsaville et al. (2002) note that ever since the publication of the DSM-III, “evidence has accumulated that prototypical mental disorders such as major depressive disorder, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder seem to merge imperceptibly both into one another and into normality” (p. 12).  As the assumption of specificity associated with the germ-model of disease has become increasingly difficult in psychiatry to justify on scientific grounds, it has also been displaced for market-pragmatic reasons.  Psychiatric disorders and their treatments are a form of knowledge formerly consumed primarily by doctors, but with direct-to-consumer marketing, the patient is becoming the consumer, and as Healy (1997) notes, “lay views of mental disturbances are more generally dimensional” (p. 216).
	As I've suggested, DSM-III's endorsement of a biomedical model was in tension with its intentional avoidance of etiological language.  Basically, “DSM-III and its subsequent editions served an essential promissory function in that they were framed as providing the foundation for future breakthroughs in psychiatry” (Whooley & Horwitz, 2013, p. 80).  This was a project that had to be completed in multiple stages.  Psychiatrists desired what Freud, in a letter to Jung, called the “indispensable 'organic explanations' without which a medical man can only feel ill at ease in the life of the psyche” (1974, p. 68).16  The psychiatrists behind DSM-III did not trust such explanations to be forthcoming without first wiping the slate clean, eliminating all of the psychodynamic baggage that was preventing the reliable statistical research that could lead to an understanding of neuropathology.  The publication of DSM-III did manage to spur a “research explosion [that] has raised many more questions than it has answered” (Michels & Marzuk, 1993, p. 552).  Yet, the diagnostic criteria that motivated all of this research in the first place have more or less stayed the same since 1980.  Although DSM-IV, published in 1994, contained a few important changes, Allen Frances, the chair of the DSM-IV Task Force, described it as a “mere [footnote] to DSM-III” (Frances, 2010b, para. 4).  
	The leaders of the DSM-5 Task Force believed that the disconnect between the DSM-III diagnostic criteria and the last 30 years of research required remedy:
The DSM-III categorical diagnoses with operational criteria... are now holding us back because the system has not kept up with current thinking.  Clinicians complain that the current DSM-IV system poorly reflects the clinical realities of their patients.  Researchers are skeptical that the existing DSM categories represent a valid basis for scientific investigations, and accumulating evidence supports this skepticism.  Science has advanced, treatments have advanced, and clinical practice has advanced since Dr. Frances’ work on DSM-IV.  The DSM will become irrelevant if it does not change to reflect these advances.  (Schatzberg, Scully, Jr., Kupfer, & Regier, 2009, para. 7)
Similar sentiments led the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to propose formal Research Domain Criteria (RDoCs) to foster research that  will
(1) define the pathophysiology of disorders from genes to behavior, (2) map the trajectory of illness to determine when, where, and how to intervene to preempt disability, (3) develop new interventions based on a personalized approach to the diverse needs and circumstances of people with mental illnesses, and (4) strengthen the public health impact of NIMH-supported research by focusing on dissemination science and disparities in care.  (Insel, 2009, p. 128)
Given the “limited state of evidence in support” of the proposed criteria, Paris (2013a) argued that “the adoption of RDoCs by the NIMH can only be described as ideological... Rushing ahead to doubtfully valid spectra that are not yet rooted in data shows a lack of patience and a lack of judgment” (p. 40).
	The given rationale for the radical changes proposed for DSM-5 was scientific progress.  One of the core values of science is openness (although, as we have already seen, sometimes a situation calls for mystification).  The issue of openness and transparency is not simply about including non-experts.  It also entails the inclusion or exclusion of various groups within psychiatry, or more largely within the field of mental health.  J. Robert Oppenheimer, a physicist who played a key role in the development of nuclear weapons, delivered a magnificent encomium to openness in science upon resigning in 1945 as director of Los Alamos Laboratory.  “Secrecy,” he argued,
strikes at the very root of what science is, and what it is for...  It is not good to be a scientist, and it is not possible, unless you think that it is of the highest value to share your knowledge, to share it with anyone who is interested.  (Oppenheimer, 2006, p. 51)
This ideal is deeply rooted in Enlightenment ideas about the role of science and rationality in building an open society.
	The scientists selected by the APA for the DSM-5 Task Force either did not share this ideal or were engaged in some (also secret) exercise in special pleading.  In his first public statement about DSM-5, Spitzer attacked the Task Force for its opaqueness, which he contended was incompatible with the Task Force's scientific aspirations:
I found out how transparent and open the DSM-V process was when in a February e-mail to me from Darrel Regier, M.D., vice chair of the DSM-V Task Force, he informed me that he would not send me a copy of the minutes of DSM-V Task Force meetings as I had repeatedly requested over the past year.  He explained that he and David Kupfer, M.D., chair of the DSM-V Task Force, had come to this decision because the Board of Trustees believed it was important to “maintain DSM-V confidentiality.”  ...I didn't know whether to laugh or cry.  Laugh—because there is no way task force and work group members can be made to refrain from discussing the developing DSM-V with their colleagues.  Cry—because this unprecedented attempt to revise DSM in secrecy indicates a failure to understand that revising a diagnostic manual—as a scientific process—benefits from the very exchange of information that is prohibited by the confidentiality agreement.  (R. L. Spitzer, 2008a, p. 26)
The APA found it difficult to defend against such poignant criticism from such an esteemed critic, which spawned a very public controversy, filled with action and conflict between protagonists and antagonists.  As Decker observed: “Rarely has the medical world—and the general public, for that matter—been witness to an open drama such has taken place... in response to a medical association’s [decision] to revise its diagnostic categories” (Decker, 2010, para. 1).  
	The APA's justification for the secrecy, that it was necessary to prevent the pharmaceutical industry (or anyone else) from stealing the APA's intellectual property rights, raised more questions than it answered.17  To what nefarious ends would these nosological pirates put their illicitly obtained knowledge, if not scientific research?  And aren't 70% of the Task Force members on Pharma's payroll in one way or another anyway (Collier, 2010)?  It did not take long for the APA to determine that this was an unwinnable fight, and so they shifted gears, and published thousands of pages of information about the then-ongoing development of DSM-5 online (dsm5.org), though they maintained the confidentiality agreements.  
	In 2010, amidst concerns about transparency and openness, the APA published preliminary draft revisions, along with notes and other details from the DSM-5 Task Force and Work Groups, on the Internet (dsm5.org), and solicited public comment over three two-month periods.  During this time, more than 500,000 people visited the website, and the APA received more 13,000 signed responses (American Psychiatric Association, 2013; Moyer, 2010).  Then, in an article defending his decisions, DSM-5 Task Force Chair David Kupfer suggested that the development process “has been highly visible, transparent to an unprecedented degree, and inclusive” (Kupfer, 2012, para. 4).  The DSM-5 development webpage echoed the claim that the DSM-5 development process is 'open and inclusive' in several places.  The high level of interest DSM-5 has garnered reflects the controversial nature of its subject matter and the scope of its influence: “The power of DSM throughout the world should not be underestimated, and it is the problem for all the psychiatrists of the future—at least until the DSM-6 is written” (Fink, 2010, p. 6).
	I suggest that the digital public space in which the nosological controversies surrounding DSM-5 took (and continue to take) place should be understood as a 'hybrid forum.'  As described by Callon, Lascoumes, and Barthe (2009), hybrid forums are
open spaces where groups can come together to discuss technical options involving the collective, [and] ...the groups involved and the spokespersons claiming to represent them are heterogeneous, including experts, politicians, technicians, and laypersons who consider themselves involved...  [The] questions and problems taken up are addressed at different levels in a variety of domains. (Callon et al., 2009, p. 18)
While it is not uncommon for scholarship on scientific controversy to take a negative view of its objects—pitting experts against commercial actors or lay publics (apologetically defending the legitimacy of one group's concerns over and against those of its interlocutors), or viewing the dissensus either tragically (e.g., the product of deception) or comically (e.g., a benign communication failure)—the concept of hybrid forum calls attention to a more appreciative view:
When scientific expertise and political voluntarism adopt the form of an authoritative discourse, they fail to respond to the questions of concerned citizens...  [Controversies] are not just a useful means for circulating information.  Nor are they reducible to simple ideological battles.  With the hybrid forums in which they develop, they are powerful apparatuses for exploring and learning about worlds... [and] overflows engendered by the development of science and techniques.  Overflows are inseparably technical and social, and they give rise to unexpected problems by giving prominence to unforeseen effects...  The controversy carries out an inventory of the situation that aims less at establishing the truth of the facts than at making the situation intelligible.  This inventory focuses first on the groups concerned, on their interests and identities...  The distribution is not known in advance but is revealed as the controversy develops, and it is precisely for this reason that the latter is an apparatus of exploration that makes possible the discovery of what and who make up society.  (Callon et al., 2009, p. 28, emphasis in original)
The digitally contested development of DSM-5 represents more than just a potential legitimation crisis for the institution of psychiatry, but an overflow through which citizens, science, and therapeutic institutions established a new relationship with one another, restructuring the way in which scientists and practitioners produce and understand psychiatric knowledge.
	Although psychiatric diagnostic controversies are older than psychiatry itself, the debates surrounding DSM-5 are unique in that they have been unfolding in a digital public sphere.  In contrast to past controversies that were either primarily driven by institutional outsiders (e.g., the anti-psychiatry movement) or motivated by ideological divisions, two of the loudest and most influential critics of DSM-5 were (and are) the lead editors of the previous two editions of the DSM, Robert Spitzer and, especially, Allen Frances.  
Method to My Madness
	This study is anti-systematic by design.18  It proceeds via an interdisciplinary theoretical synthesis punctuated by rhetorical-critical vignettes of relevant texts.  By the end of the study, the narratives dissolve into a few very specific arguments, but there was no specific theory I set out to prove, or hypothesis to test, before examining the data.  Instead, I took an iterative approach, studying the relevant texts inductively, and appealing to theory to facilitate description and interpretation.  The theoretical contents of this dissertation constitute means rather than ends.  
	The DSM-5 controversies consist of public texts, my readings of which are rhetorical.  I am guided by Gaonkar's (1997a) proposal to view
public discourse as if it were a turnstile, with speaking subjects rapidly entering and exiting, bearing dead metaphors, usable traditions, fragmented arguments, recycled images, and worn emotions.  In this mobile economy of public signs and affects, innovation is indistinguishable from bricolage and every attempt at individual voicing gets effaced by the imploding heteroglossia.  (Gaonkar, 1997a, p. 352)
Gaonkar's suggestion points to the idea of a rhetorical economy in which market dynamics trump the individual judgments of epistemic analysts and opinion-leaders.  He also suggests a methodological principle for this study, namely, to search “the public text not to ascertain the authorial signature, but to map the condition of its existence, the mode of its dissemination, and the force of its articulation” (p. 352).  The surface of a public text is “a layered and sedimented space, where the visible and the invisible are continuous” (p. 351).  I maintain that the rhetorical residues left by the articulations of a text's historical predecessors constitute the conditions of its existence, supply the terministic resources with which it may be disseminated, and enable rhetors to deploy the text persuasively.
Grounded Theory
	Gaonkar cautions that “in the humanities one has to worry about how one's critical probes might become estranged and vagrant by a mere contact with the object of analysis” (p. 352).  I therefore attempt to ground my theoretical interpretations of rhetorical dynamics in the hermeneutic insights proffered by the actors who are engaged in the controversies.  The interlocutors in the DSM-5 controversy offer a rich supply of speculative theoretical explanations for the developments about which they argue.  My primary goal is to describe the controversies, and to provide an opportunity for the actors involved to explain themselves.  While I delve into debates about specific diagnostic controversies here and arguments over procedure or nosological theory there, I do not attempt to discuss every single DSM-5 controversy, nor do I devote equal time to the controversies I do discuss.  When I focus deeply on specific controversies (e.g., over psychosis risk syndrome in Chapter 4), it is because it has become clear that the controversy functions as a representative anecdote or synecdochic signifier of a key coalescing global issue or constellation of issues.  
	I largely view the DSM-5 controversy as a substrate of a psychiatric 'actor-network,' to use Latour's (2005) term.  I follow Habermas' (2005) synthesis of conceptual nominalism with epistemic realism.  With respect to mental illness, though my beliefs are largely irrelevant, I should state them for the record: The constellations of behaviors and experiences categorized as mental illnesses all have some objective material biological basis (I regard the Cartesian division between mind and body as epistemic rather than metaphysical), but, as specific disease entities, they are socially constructed.  I have no strong opinion in either direction about whether the ongoing move toward a nosology grounded in neuro-biological explanations will lead to better treatment outcomes, though I suspect it depends upon the particular disorder.  
	One feature of the DSM-5 controversies is that identity of the argumentation field in which the controversy occurs is contested.  Defenders of DSM-5, particularly institutional authorities, argue that the controversies are fundamentally scientific in nature.  Psychiatry as a field of science functions both as a symbolic order, with a fairly clear hierarchy of values and dialectical terms, and as a terministic screen, in which some aspects of the controversy are revealed while others are rendered invisible.  Many critics of DSM-5 view psychiatry through the lens of political economy, and accordingly prioritize forces of production and market relations in their argumentative narratives.  This goes beyond focusing discussion on the literal pharmaceutical drug market.  For example, Healy argues that “drugs are clearly commodities to be traded in the marketplace, but scientific ideas are also tradable commodities” (Healy, 1997, p. 180).  Similarly, Allen Frances warns that “DSM-5 will further inflate the ADD Bubble” (Frances, 2011b, l. 1).
Rhetorical History
	The schizophrenic patient, the “paradigmatic figure” of psychiatry, has a relatively short history as an object of knowledge (Foucault, 2006; Lagrange, 2006, p. 361).  Ever since the term ‘schizophrenia’ was coined in 1911—or perhaps even earlier, when the disorder was known as ‘dementia praecox’—the diagnosis has served as a nosological exemplar, the archetypal reduction of some varieties of madness to a unified formal clinical syndrome (Bleuler, 1911b).  If depression (qua ‘neurosis’) is the common cold of psychiatry, schizophrenia (qua ‘psychosis’) is its cancer.  My description of the nosological scene in which schizophrenia (or its equivalent) acts follows from a close reading of the constitutive features of the disorder, along with the periodic controversies that have surrounded efforts to formalize those features.  
	Critical communication inquiry requires the analysis of the contradictions and trajectories of history.  Adorno (1976) suggests that society  
is neither consistent, nor simple, nor neutrally left to the discretion of categorical formulation. Rather, on the contrary, it is anticipated by its object as the categorical system of discursive logic.  Society is full of contradictions and yet determinable; rational and irrational in one; a system and yet fragmented; blind nature and yet mediated by consciousness.  The sociological mode of procedure must bow to this. (p. 105)
These contradictions are the source of public controversy.  They arise when symbolic forms, i.e., relationships between communicative action and its object, come into conflict with one another.  These conflicts occur after the relationships become taken for granted as 'things' in the world, their historical nature concealed.  To counter this, Pryor (1981) suggests that critical communication inquiry requires an historical approach:
Any critical analysis of communication would have to be historical and developmental in nature; it would have to consider particular forms of communication within a framework of movement...  Critical analysis would see communication as the practice of interacting persons who are socially and biologically determined...  As a form of historical analysis, the critique of communication would account for the development of structures which give rise to the particular communicative encounter and the actors' interpretations or definitions of that encounter...  Analysis, then, would focus on the emergence of phenomena and the determination of objects over time, as they are formed and decay.  (p. 28)
Therefore, I must examine the history of our categories of psychosis, risk, health, and medicine.  To support my claim that contemporary scientific appeals hybridize and recirculate past rhetorical forms, I will move from historical narrative to present controversy whenever I hit upon a critical juncture in the rhetorical history of a present diagnostic controversy.  For example, in Chapter 3, I begin my historical analysis of psychosis by examining the humoral model of pathology, which dominated the field of medicine for the vast majority of its existence.  This provides insight into the contemporary marketing appeals of alternative medicine.  The historical origins of hysteria is the starting point of an analysis of the controversy over conversion disorder (or functional neurological disorder, as the Somatic Symptoms Work Group would have preferred).  The first psychiatric nosological textbook, written by Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol, established a framework for visual rhetoric used today in both pharmaceutical advertising and brain imaging discourses.  In this way, Chapter 3 moves back and forth between dialectical history and contemporary controversy.
	I suggest that our representations of psychosis and risk at any given time bear the signature of the phase of modernity (or pre-modernity) from which they proceed.  To support this claim, I read psychosis both synchronically and diachronically.  The synchronic analysis of a controversy about terminologies for psychosis can produce larger insights about the contemporary symbolic orders and material relations at work in society at the time of the controversy, just as a diachronic analysis of such controversies can produce larger insights about the temporal arc of modernity.  The inverse is also true; macro-social understandings can shed light on the particularities of the microcosmic controversies themselves.
Rhetoric of Inquiry
	In addition to examining heated rhetorical texts about the DSM, this dissertation examines the DSM as a rhetorical text.  The DSM is produced within a larger conversation about psychiatric diagnosis, and so these texts reflexively relate to one another.  Scientific classification is an epistemic process by which “our mind or our brain transforms physical facts into mental entities” (Hayek, 1955, p. 48).  Inverting this formula, the classification of the disorders of our mind or our brain becomes a rhetorical process by which the DSM apparatus transforms mental entities into physical facts.  Due to the limited understanding of etiology (causes) and pathogenesis (processes) of mental illness, “the concept of psychiatric diagnosis is an especially thorny one... and, in fact, in no other field of medicine are there as many endless controversies about diagnosis as there are in psychiatry” (Paris, 2008, p. 38).  
	These controversies inseparably fuse episteme and phronesis into rhetorical trajectories, which flow out of, and are designed to suture, ruptures within standing practice.  In this context, 'practice' refers to
any coherent and complex form of socially established cooperative human activity through which goods internal to that form of activity are realized in the course of trying to achieve those standards of excellence which are appropriate to, and partially definitive of, that form of activity, with the result that human powers to achieve excellence, and human conceptions of the ends and goods involved, are systematically extended. (MacIntyre, 2007, p. 187)
Revising DSM entails reformulating an institutional logic that underwrites standards of psychiatric practice.  
	This institutional logic governs what Schiappa calls “definitive discourse—discourse that defines, whether in an explicit discourse about a definition, discourse that argues from a particular definition, or discourse that stipulates a view of reality via an argument by definition” (2003, p. xi).  Schiappa argues:
[Definitional] disputes should be treated less as philosophical or scientific questions of “is” and more as sociopolitical and pragmatic questions of “ought.”  ...Definitions put into practice a special sort of social knowledge—a shared understanding among people about themselves, the objects of their world, and how they ought to use language.  Such social knowledge typically takes the form of an explicit and often “authoritative” articulation of what particular words mean and how they should be used to refer to reality...  [The] difference between those definitions that are accepted and used and those that are not is a matter of persuasion; hence, many arguments concerning definitions are open to rhetorical analysis. (Schiappa, 2003, p. 3)
Robert Spitzer, who directed a major revision to DSM in 1980, suggested that  psychiatric nosology “defines what is the reality.  It's the thing that says this is our professional responsibility, this is what we deal with.  Once it means something, it's bound to have importance” (2000, p. 427).  Particularly in psychiatry, definitional disputes are inherently biopolitical, as the “struggle for definition is veritably the struggle for life itself” (Szasz, 1973, p. 121).
	Kenneth Burke (1969a) argues that the rhetorical function of definition is to establish boundaries: “To tell what a thing is, you place it in terms of something else” (p. 24).  Definitions also place objects of knowledge strategically within a dramatic narrative, which for Burke consists of five basic elements: “Act, Scene, Agent, Agency, [and] Purpose” (p. xv).  These are the places within a drama in which rhetorical motives are expressed.  Redefinition allows people to formulate new attitudes toward a situation, changing “not only recognizable patterns of behavior, but also our understanding of the world” (Schiappa, 1993, pp. 406–407).  Critically, this bears on the status of psychiatry as a science, for many empirical observations “are but implications of the particular terminology in terms of which the observations are made” (Burke, 1966, p. 46).  Palczewski (1994) argues that when the key definitions of a field “become the explicit subject of public argument,” a rhetorical movement forms in the “space between the system and lifeworld... [challenging] traditional distinctions between objective, subjective, and intersubjective” (pp. 39-41).
Rhetorical Subjectivity
	Psychiatric practice is a collection of simultaneously scientific, political, market, and cultural phenomena.  Further complicating the matter, psychiatry's multiple personalities are deeply interconnected.  One cannot elucidate its operation as a scientific system without first considering how it works as an institution situated within both market and lifeworld (or, even better, within a series of markets and lifeworlds).  And yet each of these natures carries different (and mutually exclusive) systemic imperatives, as well as distinct modes and capacities to invent and evaluate arguments.  These insights should draw our attention to arguments that invoke particular institutional identities for psychiatry.
Rhetorical Objectivity
	I also pay close attention to appeals to the real.  Realities “are the product of social definitions and as such far from equal in status.  Realities are contested, and textual representations are sights of struggle” (Chandler, 2002, p. 65).  Among the sea of syntagmatic substitutions and transpositions that constitute the formal elements of a rhetorical economy, pairs of terms positioned in binary opposition are of special importance:
The oppositional tensions that ferment within a universe of discourse are signaled by its vocabulary, especially its antonyms.  Public/private, liberal/conservative, radical/moderate, individual/societal: such pairs of antonyms are the matrices of rhetorical activity.  They signify fields of judgment.  They designate the topoi—the places—where commitments of political and moral significance are made and unmade... The “places” where rhetorical activity may occur are marked by the presence of linguistic antonyms.  They are symptoms of the capacity of language to support both an affirmation and a denial—a contradiction, either moiety of which is a linguistic possibility... Because antonymity may be a locus for rhetorical activity, the thorough explication of an antonym would include an inventory of the argumentative configurations possible to it.  The ways in which commitments are solicited and given—the structures of persuasion and conviction—should be illuminated by such an examination. (Black, 1992, p. 52)
Many linguistic antonyms are load-bearing features of the polytechtonic rhetoric of psychiatric nosology.  The opposition of psychosis/neurosis, which I have already touched upon and will discuss extensively in Chapter 3, is an important example.  Other linguistic antonyms of note include mind/body (and variations like psychological/biological), categorical/dimensional, deficiency/excess, balance/imbalance, ontological/physiological, melancholia/mania, and normophilic/paraphilic.  Linguistic antonyms indicate where the rhetorical action is, and they can also serve as reference points when charting a symbol's dynamically changing meaning.  For example, as I detail in Chapter 4, the term 'risk' is synonymous with 'danger' at one time, and antonymous at another.
Rhetorical Intersubjectivity
	If the meanings of psychiatric terms, concepts, and theories are constantly in flux, how do different institutional actors communicate with one another coherently?  Action coordination depends on the ability of the complicated network of actors involved in psychiatric practice to communicate with one another (Baxter, 1987).  Some scholarship in the field of the rhetoric of science grapples with this problem.  For example, Galison (2000) studied the way in which theoretical physicists, experimental physicists, and non-academic engineers working in the field of high energy physics communicate with one another.  Despite working within different epistemic paradigms, the scientists were able to communicate with one another – at least sufficiently enough to coordinate action successfully, though often they could not fully understand one another despite using the same terminology.  Galison argued that their patterns of communication resembled what anthropologists call a ‘contact language,’ a pidgin language that emerges when, for example, members of two distinct cultures without a shared language need to communicate in order to facilitate trade.  Cooper (2007) argues that the DSM is the lexicon for a contact language that “facilitates inter-paradigm communication by enabling professionals to bracket off much of what they believe for particular purposes” (p. 95).
Social Study of Science
	As such, the nosological system presented in DSM is a communication technology.  Though conceptual, it is no less a technology than any material feat of engineering.  In order for a medical technology to transform into a consumer product, it must “travel from the medical domain, relinquishing its cultural script as a measured, controlled, specific and potent therapy, to enter other social worlds.  In this process, new cultural meanings must accrue... 'rescripting' and/or 're-sculpting' the technologies' purpose” (Coveney, Williams, & Gabe, 2011, p. 379).  This process is rhetorical, and in it lies a great deal of inventional potential, although the potential for miscommunication and unintended consequences is ever present.  To help elucidate what is going on, I will draw on scholarship from the fields of science, technology, and society [STS] and the rhetoric of science.
	The social study of science and technology is a fairly young field.   Historically, scholars focused on the ‘macro-environment’ in which science occurs, emphasizing the contingency of scientific discovery by focusing on external material and institutional historical contexts that shaped the production of scientific knowledge.  More recently, scholarship has turned to the 'micro-environment,' analyzing the material items that mediate the scientific process.  Rhetorical studies of science in this vein strove to demonstrate the many ways in which the objects of science, i.e., “epistemic things... [consisting of] unstable concatenations of representations,” are also symbolic (Rheinberger, 1997, pp. 28–29).  In this study, macro and micro converge, because DSM-5 institutionalizes a particular understanding of the objects of psychiatry in order to facilitate communication across a network of diverse actors.  Psychiatric discourse is both suasive and epistemic, and diagnosis is both a scientifically-informed medical judgment and a commodity.
	The arrangement of objects institutionalized by DSM-5 accords with a neuro-biological paradigm of mental illness, in which all mental disorders are understood to “[reflect]  an underlying psychobiological dysfunction” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010d).  Daston (2000) identifies four important concepts in the rhetorical study of scientific objects: emergence, the process by which new scientific phenomena come into being as objects of inquiry; salience, the process by which old scientific phenomena that have acquired a marginalized status regain the attention of science; productivity, the degree to which an object of science can be used to produce scientific knowledge; and embeddedness, the quality of being situated in material networks of practice.  Each of these concepts is relevant to the development of this modern paradigm.  In examining the productivity of the paradigm, I do not limit myself to its scientific productivity.  Instead, I describe all of the strategic results of the paradigm, which has been productive commercially in facilitating the marketing of pharmaceuticals; productive ideologically in helping institutional apologists engage the arguments of critics; productive politically—in the sense of Giddens's (1991) notion of life politics—in helping individuals and groups define their identities, as well as build solidarity with one another; and productive culturally, effecting in the lifeworld changes in the way people conceptualize human nature and the mind.  
	In line with Shea's observation that “metaphors that are central (or fundamental) to a scientific discipline are less obviously figurative and more likely to be taken literally,” I examine the role of metaphors in the rhetoric of neuro-biological psychiatry (Shea, 2008, p. 125).  To do this, I draw on the work of Rosenman (2008), who cataloged several important psychiatric metaphors. In addition to metaphors that appear directly in DSM-5, I look for prominent metaphors in pharmaceutical advertising and categorizing as well as in the lay theorizing of those diagnosed with a mental disorder.
	As rhetoric is the counterpart to dialect, so is 'biomythology' the counterpart to the neuro-biological scientific paradigm.  In order to study biomythology, I examine what Healy calls “biobabble,” which
refers to things like the supposed lowering of serotonin levels and the chemical imbalance that are said to lie at the heart of mood disorders, ADHD, and anxiety disorders.  This is as mythical as the supposed alterations of libido that Freudian theory says are at the heart of psychodynamic disorders.  While libido and serotonin are real things, the way these terms were once used by psychoanalysts and by psychopharmacologists now—especially in the way they have seeped into popular culture—bears no relationship to any underlying serotonin level or measurable chemical imbalance or disorder of libido.  What's astonishing is how quickly these terms were taken up by popular culture, and how widely, with so many people now routinely referring [to] their serotonin levels being out of whack when they are feeling wrong or unwell. (Lane, 2009, para. 1–2)
This form of discourse appears in a variety of places, reinforced by the appearance of scientific authority.  
Materials
	This study examines how changes in psychiatric nosology are discussed in the rhetoric of social movements, the mass media, public hearings, and in the internal institutional discourse.  I aim to explain how the artistic (ethos, logos, pathos) and inartistic (statistics, metaphors, etc.) proofs circulate alongside the rhetorical motives to which they are attached, and how they change when recirculated.  I also pay careful attention to how the rhetorical contours of institutional discourse privilege or constrain the various speakers.  In order to understand the attendant controversies from a variety of angles, especially DSM-5's importance in facilitating communication among diverse social actors, I examine the following textual sources, in addition to DSM-5 itself and books written by the DSM-5 Task Force members:
(1) Popular Media
	With the publication of Peter Kramer's (1993) Listening to Prozac, along with cover-page articles about Prozac in the New York Times (Rimer, 1993) and Newsweek (Begley, 1994; Cowley, 1994; Cowley, Springen, Leonard, Robins, & Gordon, 1990), hailing Prozac as a 'wonder drug,'
Prozac had become a media event, a subject for public debate and for inclusion in screenplays. Far from being unique in this, however, it was following a trail blazed by the bromides, the barbiturates, Miltown, and Valium before it.  The mythology wheeled out—that its creation was a rational process, that it was a designer drug—had echoes in the 1955 reception of Miltown as the penicillin for anxiety. (Healy, 1997, p. 226)
This tradition continues with DSM-5.  Op-eds about the controversy have appeared in dozens of major newspapers.  As of January 2014, there are 203 articles in the Lexis-Nexis news database in which the phrase “DSM-V” or “DSM-5” appears 5 or more times, with titles like “Bad behavior isn't an illness: The manual that psychiatrists use to diagnose mental disorders is too quick to classify moral lapses as full-blown pathologies,” (Los Angeles Times, November 5, 2013), “Psychiatry in crisis: Infighting, boycotts, resignations mark fierce debate over diagnoses” (The Vancouver Sun, May 18, 2013), “Debate hot on bible of psychiatry” (Chicago Times, August 9, 2011), “The fight over a new edition of psychiatry's 'bible' reveals a field out of balance: Addicted to dealing drugs and deluded about its grasp of the mind, Ian Brown makes a diagnosis” (The Globe and Mail, July 9, 2011), “Psychiatry trying to get its disorders in order; Guide's scope will decide how – or even what – to treat” (Chicago Tribune, May 31, 2009), etc.  An analysis of these texts illuminates the ways in which the arguments in the institutional media are reconfigured and realigned.
(2) The “DSM-5 Development” Website
	During the development process, the APA presented its preliminary draft revisions (over several iterations), rationales, and public comments on the DSM-5 on an official “DSM-5 Development” website (dsm5.org), which was taken down shortly before publication in 2013 (to protect the APA's intellectual property after final decisions were made).  The way in which the website framed the DSM-5 is of particular importance.  For example, there was a list of criteria one must meet in order to be qualified to join the DSM-5 Task Force or any DSM-5 Work Group.  Given the explicit scientific justification for the DSM-5 project, one might expect this list to include necessary scientific credentials.  On the contrary, the criteria are as follows:
 • Serve without remuneration for their services with the exception of the DSM-5 Task Force Chair. • Not serve on a work group with a spouse, domestic partner, or first-degree family member. • Receive no more than $10,000 annually in the aggregate from pharmaceutical companies/device makers/ biotechnology companies and similar industry entities for direct services, such as consultancies, advisory committee positions, forensic assistance, speakers’ bureau services, etc. (These “industry entities” do not include clinical practices, hospitals, nonprofit organizations, managed care organizations, university-based lectures, and similar activities.) • Not hold stock or shares worth more than $50,000 in the aggregate in pharmaceutical companies/device makers/biotechnology companies and similar health-care related commercial ventures or receive more than $10,000 annually in the aggregate in dividends from such sources. Stock and shares held in mutual funds, pension or retirement funds, blind trusts, and similar arrangements do not count toward these limits. • Abstain from participating in any capacity in Industry Sponsored Symposia at an APA Annual Meeting during their task force and/or work group tenure after 2007. (American Psychiatric Association, 2010a)
This list clearly constitutes an argument about the propriety of the DSM-5 procedures.  It implies the existence of a particular criticism about the undue influence of the pharmaceutical industry in the process.  Likewise, a discussion of the possible new diagnoses begins with the following statement: “The goal of DSM is to establish clear criteria for diagnosing mental disorders, not to create medical conditions out of the full range of human behavior and emotions” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010c, para. 34).  Though the website presents itself as informative rather than polemical, its framing of the issues betrays a heated dispute, as argument “presupposes two distinguishable participant roles, that of a 'protagonist' and that of a—real or imagined—'antagonist'” (van Eemeren, Grootendorst, Johnson, Plantin, & Willard, 1996, p. 277).
(3) Primary and Secondary Institutional Media
	As it turns out, the APA's real antagonists published heavily in institutional media, which include the two publications of the APA, the American Journal of Psychiatry and Psychiatric News, along with other important outlets like Psychiatric Times, Psychology Today, the British Journal of Psychiatry, and The Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and Law.  Of particular importance are the criticisms of DSM-5 offered by Robert Spitzer and Allen Frances, who chaired the task forces that developed DSM-III and DSM-IV, respectively. Describing this conflict as an historic crisis of legitimacy for psychiatry as an institution, Decker observed:
A war broke out with unlikely sides: Two former editors of the American Psychiatric Association’s (APA) Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) on the one side and, on the other, the officers of the APA and the leaders of the APA’s current Task Force that is revising the DSM.  Because of the Internet, the battle has been very public, and the APA has found itself on the defensive as it became repeatedly bombarded by open letters and columns in various media outlets.  These missives were immediately seized on by multiple bloggers.  The hallmark of the campaign by the former editors has been marked by unrelenting, inescapable repetition, which has added strength to their broadsides. (Decker, 2010, para. 1)
As the lead developers of DSM-III and DSM-IV (respectively), Spitzer and Frances represent powerful critical voices in the controversy.  Spitzer, Frances, and other DSM-5 critics have raised a variety of issues, including concerns about the undue influence of the pharmaceutical industry (70% of the DSM-5 Task Force have industry ties), amplified by the lack of transparency in the development process, as well as concerns about the increasing medicalization of society (Cosgrove & Bursztajn, 2009; Elias, 2010; Moran, 2008).  The intensity of the controversy can be seen in their attacks, which are at the same time highly inflammatory and deeply personal.  
	The strategic maneuvering in DSM5.org referred to earlier could sensibly be read as responding to warnings about
...the wholesale imperial medicalization of normality that will trivialize mental disorder and lead to a deluge of unneeded medication treatments—a bonanza for the pharmaceutical industry but at a huge cost to the new false-positive patients caught in the excessively wide DSM-V net. They will pay a high price in adverse effects, dollars, and stigma, not to mention the unpredictable impact on insurability, disability, and forensics.” (Frances, 2009, para. 24)
Perhaps channeling Szasz, the infamous heresiarch, our former psychiatric Pope Frances, straightforwardly attacked the basic presupposition of DSM-5, that it is possible to arrive at a more scientific definition of mental illness: “There is no definition of a mental disorder.  It’s bullshit.  I mean, you just can’t define it... these concepts are virtually impossible to define precisely with bright lines at the boundaries” (cited by Greenberg, 2011, para. 1).  His confessor, Gary Greenberg, later reported that Frances himself was furious about how the published interview came out: “The thing I don't understand, he tells me, ...is that you think the words in the DSM are capable of great harm.  So why aren't you worried about the harm your words can do?” (Greenberg, 2013a, p. 332).  
	Much to his chagrin, anti-psychiatry groups attempted to appropriate Frances' rhetoric, forcing him to fight his war of words on two fronts:
The Alliance for Human Research Protection is attempting to draft me as an unwilling soldier in its dangerous campaign to discredit psychiatry and to discourage psychiatric patients from staying in treatment and taking medication.  In a recent posting, they make the ludicrous claim that Dr. Frances' “publicly expressed criticism of psychiatry's grandiose ambition—demonstrated by its ever expanding list of unvalidated disease designations and reliance on demonstrably harm-producing chemical interventions—essentially validates the criticism expressed by the Alliance for Human Research Protection for more than a dozen years.”  No! I must strongly disclaim this incorrect and misleading attribution.  At a fundamental level, I could not have a more opposite view of psychiatry than that expressed by the Alliance.  My critique of diagnostic inflation and over treatment in no way “validates” the Alliance and its reckless antipsychiatry rhetoric. (Frances, 2011a, para. 1–2)
For the next two years, he published at least two articles a week criticizing the DSM-5 process (most of which appear in his two blogs, “DSM-5 in Distress” and “Couch in Crisis”).  Expressing contrition, perhaps, Frances later told Greenberg that the “controversy stirred by my critique of DSM-5 is a terrible moment in the history of psychiatry,” and “the worst thing to happen to the field's credibility since Rosenhan—and psychiatry is a a field that especially requires credibility to be effective.  I know I have done grave harm” (Greenberg, 2013a, p. 329).
(4) Advertisements for Psychiatric Treatments
	I examine the way in which pharmaceutical marketing has guided the rhetorical trajectories that surround the development of DSM-5.  As Healy suggests, the psychiatric marketplace of ideas is indeed a marketplace: “The selection of scientific ideas according to their coincidence with commercial interests is becoming an increasingly important factor in shaping the academic marketplace.  Put another way, drug companies obviously make drugs, but less obviously they make views of illness” (1997, p. 181).  Andrew Lakoff (2005) coined the term “pharmaceutical reason” to refer to “the underlying rationale of drug intervention in the new biomedical psychiatry: that targeted drug treatment will restore the subject to a normal condition of cognition, affect, or volition” (p. 7).  As the biomedical model has become more firmly established over time, the categories of mental illness have increasingly aligned with the categories of pharmaceutical treatment.  
	This is also the case for the marketing of alternative 'naturopathic' treatments, which I argue borrows stasis points and topics from pharmaceutical reason even while ostensibly adopting a position in opposition to that form of rationality.  I suggest that this supports Toulmin's (1972) hypothesis that a scientific field develops through a somewhat continuous evolutionary process—because one can contest the validity of field-dependent warrants only from within the argument field in which they operate—over against Kuhn's (1962) position in favor of discontinuous revolutionary 'paradigm shifts.'
Outline of the Study
	This study proposes a rhetorical reading of psychiatric discourse that accounts for both the internal logic of the DSM revisions and the public logic of nosological controversy.  My aim is to examine the scientific psychiatric diagnostic rhetoric and to provide rhetorical diagnosis of psychiatric science.  That is, on one hand, I aim to understand the current array of nosological controversies as a rhetorical movement.  What are the conditions that make these controversies possible?  What is significant about the topics and stasis points around which discursive dissensus has coalesced?  What resources are available to the interlocutors invested in these controversies, and what accounts for their persuasive capacity?  Then, on the other hand, looking at the contested discursive field of psychiatry as an intersubjective psychic system emerging out of the materiality of late modern institutional life, what can be said about its 'mental health'?  Do the rhetorical pathologies that I shall identify proceed from some sort of neurotic collective anxiety brought on by unresolved conflicts in our persuasive appeals, root metaphors, nosological models, or institutional logics?  In other words, is this epistemic “world.. so to speak, dissociated like a neurotic” (Jung, 1964)?  The situation would be worse if psychiatry, as a psychotic science, has lost its capacity to test reality (or is at-risk of losing this capacity).  Perhaps we can attribute any rhetorical problems to material causes—that is, the realities of clinical practice and regulated for-profit psychopharmacology are like lesions interfering with the epistemic functioning of the field.
	These two categories of questions are at once distinct and yet interdependent, for the diagnostic terms we would apply can be trusted only to the extent that they do not apply (a psychotic science is, precisely, a pseudo-science).  Furthermore, our judgments about the rhetorical conditions of controversy depend upon an accurate diagnosis of the field.  By seeing the problem this way, I am embracing the radical self-referentiality of late modernity (Giddens, 1991).  The theoretical model I shall outline shortly reflects this.  Additionally, the metaphor of 'diagnosing' psychiatry is not my own, but appears over and over in the popular and professional literature.  Michael Taylor invokes this idea by suggesting that his psychiatric colleagues are as deluded as the patients they treat:
When a patient sticks to an idea that all the data indicate is false and rejects efforts by others to change his mind, the patient is said to be delusional.  When a chairman of a prominent academic department who is well-connected with the psychiatric establishment sticks to a clearly false idea, the false idea is accepted and the data are tossed out.  (Taylor, 2013, p. 60)
I have already cited several examples of this in the popular literature: the claims that psychiatry is addicted to drugs, deluded about the state of its knowledge, and obsessed with pathologizing normal problems of living.  An article about the DSM in the Wall Street Journal very succinctly adopts this metaphor in its title: “How Psychiatry Went Crazy” (Tavris, 2013).
	The first set of questions—those concerned with the contested field of psychiatric nosology as a rhetorical movement—are justified by the failure of previous studies to take up these questions with a sophisticated understanding of the rhetorical production of knowledge.  Stuart Kirk and Herb Kutchins (1992) made the closest attempt to tackle this task in their book The selling of DSM: The rhetoric of science in psychiatry, which looked at the making of DSM-III.  This is an important study, but it does not have much to say about rhetoric.  As Lewis (2006) suggests, the study essentially positions rhetoric in binary opposition to 'good science' – rhetoric is how the DSM-III task force got away with all their 'bad science':
[Rhetoric] for them means something external to the facts: an embellishment or perhaps a commentary on scientific data, rather than something integral to the data itself...  [The] bright-line distinction between the “facts” of the DSM-III field trials and the “rhetoric” used to describe these facts... hurts Kirk and Kutchins as much as it helps them.  It prevents them from stepping back from the details to see how the DSM-III developers' rhetorical frame significantly affected the facts the developers “discovered.”  And furthermore, it prevents them from recognizing that alternative rhetorical frames would have produced alternative facts. (pp. 106).
A richer view of rhetoric informs this dissertation, and motivates the basic questions it asks.
	Lewis suggests that these questions be directed toward 'models of madness,' because of their rhetorical nature:
[A] deeper rhetorical critique of the DSM involves teasing out the rhetorical frame of the current manual and comparing that frame with alternative rhetorical options.  The best way to do this is to connect a rhetorical discussion of DSM with the literature on 'models of madness,' ...[which] operate very much like a rhetorical frame: they work as an underlying organizing structure that guides the perception, selection, and methodological manipulation of psychic data.  Models of madness frame and select certain aspects of a perceived human reality and make them more salient than others.  Each model promotes its own problem definitions, explanatory concepts, research methods, and treatment recommendations. (p. 107)
Since these models of madness develop over time, this study has a strong historical focus.  But as critics of DSM-5 argue, contemporary models of madness are ever-expanding, encompassing more and more of what formerly was not regarded as mental illness (Frances, 2013; Greenberg, 2013a).  
	In a variety of different ways, risk has long been for psychiatry both an object of inquiry and a methodological attribute.  Psychiatric nosology is a risky field of knowledge.  Its validity conditions go beyond correspondence with reality—the knowledge that psychiatrists produce is invalid to the extent that it brings harm to the patients (perhaps simply by classifying them as patients).  Therefore, the rhetorical resources that enable one to justify claims about uncertainty and risk are of critical importance and must be read alongside those that justify claims about the nature of psychosis.  These issues all come together in the controversy about diagnosing 'psychosis risk syndrome,' which Allen Frances called “the most ill conceived and potentially harmful” disorder proposed for DSM-5 (Frances, 2010c, para. 1).
	For these reasons, this study focuses on the controversy over psychosis risk more than any other diagnostic category.  This study contains three preliminary steps.  I first work out a theoretical toolkit with which I can explain how the rhetoric of inquiry in a field develops over time (Chapter 2).  Next, I examine the rhetorical history of 'psychosis,' which requires a larger rhetorical history of psychiatric nosology (Chapter 3).  Then, I examine the rhetorical history of risk, before directly examining the contemporary controversy over psychosis risk syndrome (Chapter 4).  Along the way, I will examine a variety of other diagnostic controversies.  I conclude the study by discussing the implications of these different lines of inquiry for an understanding of the rhetoric of psychiatry in our contemporary late modern epoch (Chapter 5).  I shall conclude this chapter by introducing the basic argument of each of these subsequent chapters.
Polytechtonic Rhetorical Economy
	This dissertation examines the relationship between rhetorical invention and the production of knowledge.  I contend that psychiatric nosology, the systematic classification of mental illnesses, develops within a wider rhetorical economy of symbolic forms (Cassirer, 1944, 1957), ideographs (McGee, 1980), signifiers (Saussure, 1959), subject identities (Goux, 1990), and topics of invention (Aristotle, 1984; Cicero, 2009).  Knowledge workers produce, consume, trade, borrow, hybridize, and invest as “epistemic capital” (Maton, 2003, p. 62) these discursive objects through processes of “tropological exchange” (Lundberg, 2012, p. 74) and “communicative labor” (Greene, 2004, p. 189, 2007, p. 328).  These epistemic transactions depend upon the “reflexive claims of iconic associations, when system signals split, multiply, and render symbolic and material connections self-confirming, unstable, or conflicted” (Goodnight & Green, 2010, p. 119).  
	Chapter 2 provides the details about the theoretical commitments and presuppositions I hold in advancing this argument.  It explores the relationship between rhetoric and knowledge, and incorporates concepts from several different fields of social science that will prove helpful in explaining the rhetoric of psychiatric nosology.  Of particular importance are the concepts of symbolic form, institution, lifeworld, system, self-reference, and architectonic.  I suggest that bodies of scientific knowledge develop through the craft (techné) of rhetoric, because the “processes of knowing are processes of making and doing” (McKeon, 1975, p. 730).  In late modernity, this craft has become “polytechtonic” (Goodnight, 2014, p. 2).  I describe a polytechtonic model that incorporates and integrates ideas from rhetorical, sociological, cultural, and economic perspectives, reflecting the conceptual hybridity that characterizes late modernity.  These ideas serve as grounding for the historical inquiry of the next two chapters.
Rhetorical Histories of Psychosis
	Chapter 3 examines the humoral model of pathology developed by Hippocrates and Galen, a model that is discontinuous with present medical thinking and yet still serves as a rhetorical resource both within mainstream medical thinking and in popular discourse about health.  I investigate the flows and ruptures of meaning that led from antiquity to the modern models of madness, and in particular the concept of psychosis.  I then show how modern 'biobabble' and related popular rhetorics of mental health and madness derive from a series of symbolic residues of history which have matured into a few distinct models of madness.  These rhetorics show up in discourses which align with the neuropsychiatric model, as well as those which align with subaltern psychodynamic or alternative 'naturopathic' models.  
	The currently hegemonic neurobiological model has its immediate origins in the nineteenth century but involves discursive forces that have been developing dialectically since the time of Hippocrates.  I trace the rhetorical history of modern models of madness through which psychosis has become an object of knowledge.  Through the various twists and turns of material history, alongside adjacent rhetorical moves, a perspective on the self-generating processes of discursive formations becomes visible.  I show how our contemporary concepts of psychosis are the result of the projection of tensions between discrete and continuous terminologies, ontological and functional interpretations of health and sickness, and psychodynamic and neurobiological descriptions of the mind into the temporal dimension.
	Over the course of the chapter, I bring into focus the elements of the various models of madness operative in contemporary controversies, and show how, in every case, their development and persuasive validity derives from the re-purposing and hybridization of the topics, tropes, and forms of already-established models.  Furthermore, I show that these remain available as rhetorical resources today.  Certain patterns in the cyclic alternation between terminologies that prioritize continuity and those that prioritize discontinuity also become clear.  In particular, I show the importance of visual rhetorical forms in the dissemination of new scientific configurations of knowledge.
Psychosis Risk Society
	The rhetorical history of the concept of psychosis with which Chapter 3 concludes leads into Chapter 4, which focuses on the medicalization controversy surrounding the diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome.  I investigate how such controversies motivate action, and tease out the rhetorical motives that animate the polemical discourse such controversies inspire.  More specifically, I examine the controversy surrounding the proposal to officially recognize a 'psychosis risk syndrome,' a diagnosis that would apply to those people (primarily adolescents) judged to be at an increased risk of becoming psychotic at some future point, at a sufficient level of certainty to justify some sort of medical intervention.
	Psychosis risk syndrome exemplifies a wider contemporary phenomenon, the medicalization of risk, which entails conceptualizing some probable problematic future situation as a kind of illness or disease.  Medicalization itself is a risk phenomenon, and the medicalization of risk is a phenomenon in the very image of reflexive modernity.  Ivan Illich (1976) famously described the situation that gives rise to the question of whether some problem by its nature belongs to the domain of health: “Each civilization defines its own diseases.  What is sickness in one might be chromosomal abnormality, crime, holiness, or sin in another” (p. 37).  Once formulated as a health concern and pathologized, a putative disease entity is on course to fall under the technical gaze of expertise, which will occur when acceptable subjective and objective criteria are developed and institutionalized.  
   	The concept of medicalization is relatively recent—the term entered discourse in the 1960s, and first appeared in a dictionary (of jargon) in 1987 (Aronson, 2002).  Medicalization has been defined as “a process by which non-medical problems become defined and treated as medical problems, usually in terms of illness and disorders” (Conrad, 2007, p. 4).  Fairly recent examples include baldness (alopecia), bad breath (halitosis), impotence (erectile dysfunction), overactive bladder (detrusor instability), shyness (social anxiety), and too much plastic surgery (body dysmorphic disorder), to name just a few (Conrad, 2005, 2010; Conrad & Leiter, 2004; Conrad & Schneider, 1992; Ghigi, 2009; Lane, 2007; Maturo, 2009; Payer, 1992).  There are two primary pathways to medicalization: “the pathologizing of normal biological or social variation and... the portrayal of the presence of risk factors for disease as a disease state itself” (Heath, 2006, p. e146).  Some examples of diseases constructed from risk factors, sometimes called “prediseases” or “pre-conditions... a medical label [for] people who are at risk of being at risk,” include 'high' blood pressure, 'high' cholesterol, menopause, obesity, pre-diabetes, and pre-osteoporosis (Gambrill, 2012; Moynihan, 2010, p. 485).  Market dynamics drive the process by exerting a downward pressure on the severity thresholds of the newly medicalized phenomena:
Due to the shape of the typical disease bell curve, lowering the severity threshold at which people think they have a 'real' disease and need drug treatment typically expands the potential market by a factor of ten or more.  It is only with a low severity threshold that a PR firm can whip up a proper scare campaign about a hidden epidemic of disease that affects ten, twenty, or fifty million people. (Brody, 2008, p. 241)
Industry is only one side of the issue: The neo-liberal structuring of academia also encourages researchers to carve out new pet conditions and promote them to the public (Moynihan, 2011).  The rampant medicalization of the problems and risks of modern life has left us increasingly intolerant of relatively mild complaints and increasingly anxious about risk (Barsky & Borus, 1995; Conrad, Mackie, & Mehrotra, 2010; McCormick, 1996).  
	I argue that psychosis risk syndrome and the surrounding controversy are synecdochic of macro-level dynamics occurring in our late modern society.  To establish this, I first trace the historical development of the modern concepts of risk, and I argue that at each stage of its conceptual development, a residue is produced that shows up in some manner in the discourses of psychiatry.  I then sketch out the argumentative landscape of the controversy over psychosis risk syndrome.  I analyze how the interlocutors approach and utilize risk, and distill out several apparent risk ontologies that serve to background these approaches.  I also examine how risks flow through the systems world, moving from deliberative to forensic contexts, and I examine how the DSM makes use of the rhetorical forms of secrecy and disclosure in an attempt to regulate the rhetorical risk market.  After investigating what the rhetorical contest over the medicalization of risk can tell us about our contemporary risk society, I examine the intersections of episteme and phronesis entailed in the medicalization of crime.
That Commodified Supplement
	Chapter 5 concludes the study.  It explores the way in which diagnosis as instantiated by the DSM apparatus factors into emerging politics of the supplement.  Politics of the supplement engage a cluster of concerns that regulate the risks inherent in the rhetorical commerce that enable an individual to pursue a “reflexive project of the self” (Giddens, 1991, p. 5).  I argue that a cluster of institutional, political, social, and rhetorical forces have changed the very meaning of a psychiatric diagnosis.  Once thought of as a medical technology with use-value, I suggest that a psychiatric diagnosis' exchange-value now dominates.  As I trace the dynamics of this transition, I investigate the ways in which the commodification of diagnosis and the associated reification of mental illness can promote alienation, on one hand, and solidarity, on the other.
CHAPTER TWO: POLYTECHTONIC RHETORICAL ECONOMY
“Each speech must be put together like a living creature, with a body of its own; it must be neither without head nor without legs; and it must have a middle and extremities that are fitting both to one another and to the whole work.” – Socrates19

“But their method is just as if one were to take hands, feet, a head, and other body parts from diverse places, each constructed very well indeed, but not fitting to a single body, and neither in any way proportionate to one another, so that a monster rather than a man would be composed from them. ” – Nicholas Copernicus20

“Verbal rhetoric... should not make technology the operation of a machine, in which the message is a massage; it should not take its form from its medium and it should not be adapted to use to communicate established judgments (which are jostled commonplaces) or revolutionary convictions (which are repeated dogmas) in the supposition and intimation that they might be related to traditional ends or novel objectives and that they are somehow means to those ends... It should be positive in the creation, not passive in the reception, of data, facts, consequences, and objective organization.” – Richard McKeon21

“They build on sense, then reason from th'effect, On well-establish'd truths their schemes erect; By these some new Phaenomena explain; And light divine in every prospect gain.” – Samuel Bowden22

***
	This chapter adumbrates the role of rhetorical activity in the institutional production of knowledge.  My framework is interpretive, rather than positivist, seeking to explain rather than to predict.  Although rhetoric exhibits a systematic element, it yields no master narrative or ultimate order.  Rhetoric is explained in terms of a variety of contingent models that underwrite psychiatric discourse as a practice.  Although the approach is informed by several canonical sociological theories, to which I intend to be faithful except where I note otherwise, hermeneutic utility trumps theoretical fidelity.  Thus the chapter lays out social structures that invite vectors of influence, but each has a unique constitution and outcomes which need attention.  Before attending to the chapter, I will lay out its structure and define key terms.  This is necessary to appreciate rhetoric in the complex maneuvers to articulate, justify, and defend a public debate over mental health.  Terms include the relationship of rhetoric to epistemics, institutions, practice, and polytechtonic discourse.
	1. Rhetoric as Epistemic.  The central, general question to be addressed in this chapter: What is the role of rhetoric in the production and transmission of technical knowledge?  Although the epistemic nature of rhetoric has been the subject of much debate over several decades (Brummett, 1976, 1990; Cherwitz & Hikins, 1986; Farrell, 1990; Harpine, 2004; Herrick, 1997; Leff, 1978; McKerrow, 1977; Railsback, 1983; R. L. Scott, 1976, 1967), my interest is in the classical conceptions of rhetoric that, as my thesis suggests, have been unfolding throughout history and remain relevant today.  The models to which I attend are those debates over health and medicine that are less about how either rhetoric or the production of knowledge works in practice per se, and more about defining epistemic boundaries (Gaonkar, 1997b; McCloskey, 1997).  Contestation over boundaries has always brought into question the norms, standards, and problems of knowledge production in contexts of practice.  Practice is continually challenged by contingent matters with positive and negative outcomes.  Decisions have to be made under the pressures of time, uncertainty, and circumstance.  Over time, the ongoing practice of judgment is translated into an epistemic inheritance that guides or regulates conduct.  State of the art practices themselves are subject to extension, revision, or scrapping.  I examine three epistemic functions of rhetoric: mediating the communication of knowledge through time (memory), inventing new arguments (technical art), and expanding the range of signification (symbolic forms).  These aspects contribute to the life of institutions.
	2. Rhetoric and Institutions.  Institutions are rhetorical organizers, containers, and sites of invention.  Powerful modern institutions deploy resources that persuade non-experts to trust experts, supplying symbolic tokens that experts and non-experts alike may use as surrogate reasoning media.  Scholarship in rhetorical institutionalism, which emphasizes the importance of discourse and meaning in institutional processes, suggests that institutions constrain and enable the agency of actors who would make use of specialized knowledge and deploy symbols strategically (Giddens, 1991; Green & Li, 2011).  An institution guides the development of social knowledge by supplying myths that legitimate the practices and beliefs with which it is associated (Alvesson, 1993).  Institutions anchor instrumental systems within which experts produce technical knowledge to the lifeworld.  In so doing, they shape the development of knowledge within the systems-world.  One mechanism by which this occurs is by curating texts in the institutional canon.  By developing and managing the symbols (both linguistic and non-discursive) that signify units or categories of specialized knowledge, institutions regulate the way individuals in a society think and communicate about the problems they face.  
	3. Rhetoric and Practice.  Institutions may offer stable platforms to regulate practice.  However, they also provide sites for “institutional entrepreneurs” who “use language to manipulate meaning and thus theorize and create endogenous change” (Green & Li, 2011, p. 1670).  Further, in the increasingly complex world of late modernity, attention, comprehension, and signification are limited resources that actors must manage and optimize (Simon, 1978).  They do so “through persuasion, or the deployment of symbols, to construct and manipulate meaning” (Green & Li, 2011, p. 1670).  These processes occur in what I call a rhetorical economy.  This economy contains an ideas market, in which institutional entrepreneurs attract investors in their research and sell their ideas to other knowledge workers or to public consumers (DiMaggio, 1988).  A rhetorical economy also governs the forces of signification exchange.  Symbolic strategies for coming to terms with social relationships can be exchanged for material resources and legitimation.  Actors secure the cooperation of others by accepting the symbolic order within which the cooperative relationship has a fixed meaning.  Justification governs epistemic valuation.  As these processes play out, guided by emergent market logics, I suggest that 'epistemic bubbles' may form under certain conditions.  An epistemic bubble occurs when speculation drives actors to systematically overvalue an idea or cluster of ideas, leading to a characteristic rise and crash.  
	4. Rhetoric as Polytechtonic Art.  The mix of stable practitioners and entrepreneurs producing partnered change constitutes a polytechtonic art.  This idea integrates the epistemic functions of rhetoric discussed in the first section with rhetorical institutionalism and the concept of a rhetorical economy.  Richard McKeon suggests that as “an architectonic art relating and directing arts, sciences, and actions by principles,” rhetoric organizes institutions and integrates fields of knowledge (1981, p. 431, my emphasis).  Using McKeon's architectural metaphor, I examine the 'building' of psychiatric nosology.  I suggest that the disconnected and competing constructs that constitute this building point to the shift from architectonic to polytechtonic rhetoric (Goodnight, 2014).  To explain how psychiatric nosology developed into its current polytechtonic form, I turn to Luhmann's theory of social systems, retaining part of his model while updating his impoverished view of communication with the concept of polytechtonic rhetoric.  Of particular interest is Luhmann's account of how a social system reproduces itself and changes in the process.  Considering a scientific field as an epistemic social system, I examine two competing theories: Kuhn's suggestion that change occurs through sudden, revolutionary shifts between incommensurate paradigms, and Toulmin's contention that the process is not revolutionary but evolutionary due to the importance of common field-dependent warrants.  I hypothesize that Toulmin's theory better explains the development of psychiatric nosology and is more consistent with the notion of a polytechtonic rhetorical economy.
	The definition of rhetoric as polytechtonic paves the way for an understanding of the complex, often contradictory demands on extension, justification, and defense of new criteria for diagnosing and recognizing mental illness.  Due to the great reflexivity and interdisciplinarity of late modernity, contemporary psychiatric nosological discourses invoke concepts from these different fields.  Although the logic of epistemic labor within the academy aims toward increasing specialization, I suggest that the field of rhetoric is an anti-specialty, conversant across many fields of expertise: a polytechtonic art for a polytechtonic age.  The chapter elaborates the key terms defined above in order to construct a robust notion of a polytechtonic rhetoric capable of appreciating the dynamics of interfield and public controversy.
Rhetoric as Epistemic
	Rhetoricians have long concerned themselves with understanding and articulating the relationship between language and knowledge.  Ever since rhetoric emerged as an object of inquiry, scholars have been divided about its nature and scope.  Broadly speaking, the various interpretations of rhetoric can be divided into two groups.  The first limits rhetoric to public communication, which includes public deliberation, forensic (courtroom) debates about guilt and innocence, and ceremonial oratory that either praises or blames a specific person, community, object, or concept.  In its strongest form, rhetoric is further limited to political discourse, upon which the functioning of any democratic order depends.  This category roughly corresponds with McCloskey's (1997) notion of 'Little Rhetoric.'  The second category, which corresponds to the notion of 'Big Rhetoric,' tends to see rhetoric as encompassing all aspects of culture.  In its strongest form, rhetoric mediates all human communication, or at least all symbolic action, without which no meaning is possible.  Theories in the first category tend to associate rhetoric with persuasion, while theories in the second category either expand the scope of rhetoric beyond persuasion to include at least the entirety of semantics, or expand the scope of persuasion to encompass all of human communication.
Memory as Epistemic Function of Rhetoric
	In ancient Greece, the Sophists (responsible for the first formalized rhetorical education schools) adopted a wide view of rhetoric that included anything capable of communicating knowledge (Wardy, 1996).  Some sophists believed that through rhetoric, one could communicate knowledge that did not exist prior to the communication.  Working in the same classical milieu, Plato has been credited with developing the view that knowledge is “justified true belief” (Gettier, 1963, p. 121; Southerland, Sinatra, & Matthews, 2001).  While some sophists (e.g., Gorgias)23 quibbled about whether there was such a thing as 'truth,' they believed that justifying beliefs and persuading others to accept them as true was firmly within the province of rhetoric.
	While Plato's relationship with rhetoric was complex,24 he maintained that dialectical rhetoric constituted a valid epistemic technique.  According to Plato's theory of knowledge, all learning is in fact remembering, which always involves some measure of dialectical reasoning.  Thus, his discussion of types of memory is important because it is really a discussion of different ways of acquiring knowledge through communication.  This is important to my thesis about the recurrence of rhetorical residues in scientific discourse, which suggests that the discovery of new knowledge occurs through the hybridization of the rhetorical forms that embodied now-forgotten knowledge.  In the Phaedrus, Socrates refers to two types of memory: hypomnesis, by which one recalls fixed events directly, and anamnesis, a living memory by which we recall “the things our soul saw when it was traveling with god, when it disregarded the things we now call real and lifted up its head to what is truly real instead” (sec. 249c).
	Hypomnesis, by which Phaedrus has mentally stored a verbatim transcript of the speech he heard the famous sophistic lawyer Lysias deliver, suffers from the inability to distinguish between what is actually true and what is only apparently true.  When the mind directs its attention toward the image of a text, the focus remains on maintaining all of the details of that text, rather than on a critical evaluation of its meaning and implications.  This kind of memory is not trustworthy because it is alienated from the thing remembered.  At best, it “can only serve as [a] reminder to those who already know” (sec. 278a).  The example of memories falsely recovered under hypnosis is apt here (Spanos, Burgess, Burgess, Samuels, & Blois, 1999).  
	Anamnesis, in contrast, works when one identifies enough aspects of the truth, which indirectly is present in everything (which is why Socrates listens to Lysias’ speech), that one becomes aware of a true insight about the soul.  'An-amnesis' contains the root of our word 'amnesia,' and can be thought of as a form of 'anti-amnesia.'  Bindé (2000) speaks of anamnesis as a “memory of the future,” that is, a “living memory, anchored in the present and focused on the future” (p. 70).  This kind of memory, Socrates argues, requires one to distinguish between truth and conventional wisdom—though there is truth in all conventional wisdom, it can only be discovered when the conventional wisdom is questioned, rather than taken into the mind uncritically.
	Psychoanalytic theorists took up this same notion millennia later.  For Plato, we have access to the Forms before biological life begins, forgetting what we know of them when we are born into the material realm.  For Freud, our forgetting occurs over time as we emerge from childhood, and what we forget leaves “the deepest traces on our minds and [has] a determining effect upon the whole of our later development,” and sometimes can make us mentally ill:
Hysterical amnesia, which occurs at the bidding of repression, is only explicable by the fact that the subject is already in possession of a store of memory-traces which have been withdrawn from conscious disposal, and which are now, by an associative link, attracting to themselves the material which the forces of repression are engaged in repressing from consciousness. (Freud, 1924b, p. 260)
Just as Freud argued that “psychical acts and structures are invariably overdetermined” by these residues of the past, I suggest that our epistemic acts and structures are overdetermined by our vast rhetorical unconscious (Freud, 1913b, p. 482).  Contemporary narratives that are ignorant of the past suffer from amnesia.  Our historical narratives that fail to understand how the past operates in the present are hypomnestic.  To be anamnestic, epistemic communication must lead to a new (true) understanding about human nature, which is then inspired among others and retained by all.  When this occurs, we have “[come] to terms with the past” (Adorno, 1986, p. 115).
Rhetoric as Technical Art
	In contrast to the abstraction of Plato, Aristotle took a more pragmatic approach to rhetoric and knowledge.  Persuasion occurs through the use of pístis (??????), named after of the god of good faith, trust, and reliability,  usually translated as 'proof.'  There are two types of rhetorical proofs: inartistic, or a-technic, from atechnoi (???????), and artistic, or en-technic, from entechnoi (????????) (Aristotle, 1984, sec. 1355b).  Aristotle further distinguishes between two terms I discussed in Chapter 1: techn? (?????), meaning craftsmanship or art, and epist?m? (????????), meaning knowledge or science.  This distinction follows Plato, who associated rhetoric with techn? and dialectic with epist?m?, but, for Aristotle, the difference between the two is that episteme refers to the disinterested discovery of objective knowledge (either logical truths like the Principle of Non-Contradiction or the Law of the Excluded Middle, or of natural truths like the existence of various types of fish), while techn? refers to the practically motivated production of knowledge.  His Organon deals with episteme, while the four books of practical philosophy (the Nichomachean Ethics,the Politics, the Rhetoric, and the Poetics) concern techn?.  
	Practical matters of public concern—e.g., the choice between war and diplomacy, or judging the killing of a child to be murder or self-defense—are contingent rather than necessary, and their 'truth' is relative to the norms and attitudes of the community facing the decision.  For example, whether or not someone who probably is guilty, but may very well be innocent, should be punished, depends in part on the degree to which his or her behavior is repugnant to the public.  Additionally, because error is always possible in contingent matters, another relevant factor is the public's relative tolerance for Type I and Type II errors.
      The 'en-technic' artistic proofs consist of persuasive arguments that a speaker can create in the audience.  They are of particular importance to Aristotle, as can be seen in the definition of rhetoric he provides in Book II, to wit, that rhetoric is the ability in any particular case to see the available means of persuasion.  Rhetoric requires the speaker to have knowledge about the audience, and to use that knowledge to create in the audience knowledge about how to respond to some exigent contingent problem.  There are three types of artistic proofs: ethical appeals, in which the speaker creates in the audience trust and the belief in his or her credibility, and accordingly are speaker-focused; pathetic appeals, in which the speaker creates in the audience an emotional involvement in the speech, and accordingly are audience-focused; and logical appeals, which create in the audience the logical connections between arguments in the speech that are necessary for the speech to be understood as reasonable, and accordingly are message-focused.25  
      In contrast, the inartistic 'a-technic' proofs do not create knowledge on their own—rather, they are attached to the artistic proofs in order to justify their claims.  Unlike the artistic proofs, which are expressly created by the speaker through the process of rhetorical invention, the inartistic proofs exist beforehand.  Some examples of inartistic proofs are statistical facts, examples, quotations from a trusted authority, germane documents such as a legal statute or a signed contract, and, importantly, logical premises that already have been accepted by the audience and can be taken for granted.  Whether or not an inartistic proof is persuasive depends on the rules of argumentation that have been accepted by the community.  I am more likely to persuade a Christian than an atheist to accept a claim backed by scripture.  
      The last type of inartistic proof I mentioned is especially powerful, however, because it is always persuasive by its very nature. Unlike the other inartistic proofs which are explicitly presented in the speech, a taken-for-granted premise or assumption is powerful when it is unstated.  Speakers employ this proof through enthymemes, usually understood to mean an informal version of a syllogistic argument in which the minor premise is unstated. Indeed, Aristotle refers to the enthymeme (from enthým?ma [????????], which literally means 'within the soul') as a 'rhetorical syllogism.'  
      Enthymemes are central to Aristotle's rhetorical theory.  The enthymeme is the counterpart to the syllogism, just as rhetoric is the counterpoint of dialectic.  An enthymeme can take the audience’s understanding as the starting place, and, taking advantage of its assumptions and prejudices, transform a virtually incomprehensible (to the audience) dialectical argument into a persuasive rhetorical argument.  An enthymeme bolsters ethical appeals because it shows that the speaker is so aligned with the audience that she takes for granted the same assumptions that they take for granted.  A preacher does not remind his or her congregation of the trustworthiness of scripture every time scripture is quoted—to do so is both unnecessary and potentially off-putting. Enthymemes also bolster logical appeals because they cause the audience to make logical connections themselves, and it is difficult to find one's own ideas unpersuasive.  When the implied minor premise concerns a matter with which audience members are emotionally involved, an enthymeme can bolster pathetic appeals.
      In this sense, Aristotle reverses Plato's contention that dialectic, rather than rhetoric, is required to arrive at true knowledge.  For Aristotle, when dealing with a lay audience, it is rhetoric, rather than dialectic, that can bring new knowledge to the audience.  Weaver (1970a) explains that through an enthymeme, “the rhetorician enters into a solidarity with the audience by tacitly agreeing with one of its perceptions of reality” (p. 173).  The enthymeme involves premises which are merely probable, rather than true by necessity, and the degree to which the audience finds them likely depends upon the strength of that solidarity created between speaker and audience.  If the argument rests on an implied assumption about reality that is essentially the same in the mind of the speaker as it is in the audience, then the audience tends to regard the premises as extremely likely.  
	No division akin to Aristotle's three categories of artistic proof appears in Plato's dialogs, probably as a consequence of his belief that the ultimate underlying nature of reality is ideal, and one characteristic of the ideal world is its unity.  Aristotle's realist approach, in contrast, recognizes the existence of both material objects and ideals, and along similar lines led him to a more nuanced understanding of the unity of reality, distinguishing between things like substance and accident; matter, form and purpose; analogical and equivocal relationships; different orders of true knowledge, etc.  Though all kinds of oratory involve all three basic kinds of appeals, each appeal speaks to a different kind of communicative need, and some situations call for the emphasis of one kind of appeal over another.  
	Further, Aristotle identifies the three broad genres of rhetoric I briefly introduced above: the deliberative, which seeks to establish the expediency of a particular course of action and which is oriented toward the future; the forensic, which seeks to establish the justice of some behavior, personal act, or event, and which is oriented toward the past; and the epideictic, which seeks to establish the honor or dishonor of a person, thing, or ideal, and which is oriented toward the present.  Each genre must make use of each kind of appeal, but in some cases there is a natural association.  For example, deliberative rhetoric tends to rely heavily on appeals to ethos, for if the speaker can convince the audience that he or she is an expert who has the audience’s best interests in mind, it stands to (the audience’s) reason that the advocated proposal is a good idea.  The best way for a speaker to convince an audience that their best interests are in mind, of course, is to demonstrate that he or she is in the same boat, so to speak, as the audience, and therefore has self-interested reasons to desire the best for the audience.  This is done rhetorically by moving oneself to the audience, identifying with their political interests.  Forensic rhetoric tends to emphasize appeals to pathos, as the audience typically considers itself disinterested and impartial, and so persuasion tends to work when the audience is moved to the position of the victim (when prosecuting) or the alleged criminal (when  defending).  The audience is moved only when their emotions are invoked, as “the emotions are all those feelings that so change men as to affect their judgments” (Aristotle, 1984, sec. 1378a).
	The classical conception of rhetoric as a technical art contrasts with an idea that has some currency in certain far right and far left political circles, namely, that words are simply epiphenomenal of material reality, which is regarded as the only reality worthy of the name.  From this follows a sharp distinction between a science's subject-matter and style of expression.  Contemporary advocates of 'neuropsychiatry' sometimes express this view in the same breath that they curse the Cartesian mind-body split that, they insist, is the root of the errors of psychoanalysis.  In Chapter 3, I explicate a specific instance of this: the hysteria surrounding hysteria.  
	Richard Weaver criticizes this approach to social science, which he identifies with positivism.  Invention, he insists, belongs to the domain of rhetoric—the novel arguments made by social scientists are developed rhetorically rather than empirically.  Indeed,
rhetoric is... a process of coordination and subordination which is very close to the essential thought process... [and] in any coherent piece of discourse there occur promotion and demotion of thoughts... [which] involve matters of sequence, of quantity, and some understanding of the rhetorical aspects of grammatical categories. (Weaver, 2011, p. 210)
McCloskey (1998) compares the inability of her fellow economists to understand this to mental illness, and concludes:
A rhetorical cure for these mental disabilities... is literary and rhetorical.  The cure would not throw away the illuminating regression, the crucial experiment, the unexpected implication unexpectedly falsified.  These too persuade reasonable scholars.  Nonargument is the alternative to narrow argument only according to the dichotomies of modernism.  The cure would restore the health of economics, disguised now under the neuroses of an artificial methodology of science. (pp. 184-185, my emphasis).
Her arguments about economics apply equally to psychiatry, and her 'psychiatric treatment' is remarkably similar to the one proposed by Dewey.  
	Dewey's (1954) proposed cure for this sort of psychosis is the instantiation of a 'Great Community,' which should be “saturated and regulated by mutual interest in shared meanings, consequences which are translated into ideas and desired objects by means of symbols” (pp. 153-154).  These new symbols could be invented and propagated through art, as “the function of art has always been to break through the crust of conventionalized and routine consciousness” (p. 183).  Over against the suggestion that art exists for art's sake, Burke (1974) suggests that literature is “equipment for living” (p. 492).  Along these lines, McCloskey avers:
If translated into English, most of the ways economists talk among themselves would sound plausible enough to poets, journalists, business people, and other thoughtful noneconomical folk.  Like serious talk anywhere... the talk is hard to follow when one has not made a habit of listening to it for a while. (p. xvii)
She contends that the difference between art and science is smaller than is commonly supposed.  For example, statistics are “figures of speech in numerical dress” (p. 56).  Likewise, Renaissance literary criticism relies on “the logic of probability and the counting of frequencies” (p. 56).  McCloskey explicitly is not challenging the claim that economics is a science; rather, she contends that “all science is humanism (and no 'mere' about it) because that is all there is for humans.  Economics is scientific, then, but literary too... one can talk of it in ways that sound a lot like the things people say about drama, poetry, novels, and the study of them” (p. 57).
Rhetoricity of Symbolic Form
	The language of reasoning and of persuasion is clearly a symbolic form that serves an epistemic function, but where did it come from?  Cassirer (1944) suggests that when prehistoric humans first began to use symbols to communicate, the symbolic form available to them was very limited in its ability to refer to objects.  Symbolic action can only produce knowledge about the objects that can be signified symbolically.  The epistemological implications of this are profound: it is not merely that one cannot learn about a potential object of knowledge, but that one cannot even think about that object.  Nothing that is not an object of knowledge lies within the circumference of the lifeworld.  As a result, the development of symbolic forms is slow—without a symbolic form capable of referring to a specific kind of object, humans cannot see any need for developing such a symbolic form.  
	Cultural evolution is driven by the development of more epistemically powerful symbolic forms.  Beliefs or practices that dominate a particular culture can be explained in terms of the symbolic forms available to members of that culture.  Along with Aristotle, Cassirer argued that the drive to experience meaning is an innate feature of human nature.  Since the experience of meaning is mediated by symbolic communication through a symbolic form known to members of a culture, the drive to experience meaning entails a drive to participate in cooperative social activities that facilitate symbolic communication.  This is the source of rituals, shared beliefs, and just about every behavior that is a characteristic of a culture that those outside of that culture would regard as bizarre.
	Psychiatric nosology is a symbolic form.26  It provides us with the ability to refer to certain patterns of observed behavior and relayed subjective experiences as discrete disease entities.  In order to make use of it, one also needs a language for describing those patterns of behavior, and the broader idea that certain similar observed actions can be made into behavioral categories.  The patient also needs a language for describing his or her subjective experiences, with the understanding that they belong to a broader category of sickness-related experiences, and that they are medically (and not, say, religiously) relevant.  The entire enterprise can only occur within a symbolic universe that provides the capacity to draw inferences about causal relationships.  Chapter 3 will explore how this symbolic form came into existence, what symbolic forms preceded it, and how they all relate together.
	The available symbolic forms function as the ‘uncaused cause’ of a culture's worldview.  Just as Aristotle’s (1941b) 'unmoved mover' is indivisible, unalterable, and in an eternal state of contemplating itself contemplating, so is this fundamental assumption of communication.  It is indivisible because communication ceases to be communication if there is no one with whom one may come to an understanding, or if nothing exists about which one person might come to an understanding with another.  It is unalterable because no two communicators can come to a mutual understanding about the undesirability of coming to mutual understandings, for the orientation toward mutual understanding characterizes communicative action.  The symbolic constitution of a culture eternally contemplates itself, for an act of communication implicitly contains a judgment about its own capacity to facilitate contemplation among those moved by that judgment.
	During the Enlightenment, distinct forms emerged that could refer to a wide array of distinct objects, further expanding the circumference of symbolic reference.  The new forms include science, art, secular ethical discourse, and history.  The culmination of the Enlightenment corresponded with the expanding circumference of referential facility such that it included itself.  Self-reference and reflexivity emerged as major problems in so many distinct domains of knowledge.  Self-reference introduces a certain epistemic problem whereby an act of measurement is part of the system of phenomena being measured.  Facts are in a certain sense made as much as they are discovered.  Every modern field of knowledge deals with this problem in one way or another.  In psychiatry, this problem manifests in a variety of ways, one of the most significant of which is the central problem taken up in Chapter 4, i.e., the diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome, in which a measurement that aims at disclosing the future is used in order to change the future.  The debate is so heated in part because of the profound consequences of distinguishing between the 'weird' and the 'mentally ill.'
	The expansion and universalization of symbolic form after the Enlightenment paradoxically diminished the epistemic power of symbolic action (or, more precisely, made us aware that we had been overestimating our epistemic abilities).  Furthermore, we started to become skeptical of the Cartesian subject of the Enlightenment, and in particular the metaphysical division of mind and body.  Given our new abilities to use symbols to refer to every object of reality, both symbolic and material, as well as our discovery that the experience of symbolic meaning is mediated materially (according to material phenomena occurring in our brains), the idealist orientation lost a fair bit of ground to the materialist orientation.  
	Furthermore, a relativistic understanding of truth began to replace a more absolute one.  During the medieval era, the whole world (as far as we knew about it in the West) was part of the same culture, with the same rituals, metaphysical beliefs, and epistemic practices.  This inclined us to adopt an absolutist conception of truth, and it was so strong that we thought nothing of doing things like burning heretics (i.e., people with an alternative metaphysical picture of the world) at the stake.  The Enlightenment overturned the unifying but unwarranted beliefs that characterized the medieval era, but medieval universalism was replaced with modern universalism in the form of a universal subject with a universal faculty to discover truth through reason. 	Yet in the aftermath of the Enlightenment, when the whole world came under our gaze, we discovered alien and bizarre cultures with strange worldviews resulting from the differences between their symbolic universes and our own.  To the extent that a particular form of reason was posited to be a universal symbolic form, that belief had to be surrendered, having been falsified empirically.  What was still residually in the cultural memory of classical Greece was finally being rediscovered, and just as it motivated the sophists to adopt a materialist and relativistic stance, so too did it motivate us to adopt a philosophical outlook that tends toward what is sometimes called the post-modern, proper to the age of late modernity.  
	Martin Heidegger profoundly expressed the new conception of truth and its relationship to previous symbolic orders.  With respect to metaphysics, Heidegger (2008) claimed that our culture had lost the ability to contemplate Being as such, because we had lost our ability to conceive of Being's inverse, Nonbeing.  Ever since Plato equated Being as such with a being (in his case, the good; in the Aristotelian/Thomistic case, God; and even in Nietzsche's case, the eternal recurrence of the will to will), the only sort of non-being we could understand is a metaphysical order without that being (which periodically happened, as for example is apparent in Nietzsche's observations about the event known as the death of god).  As a consequence, we cannot ask the fundamental question that enabled philosophical inquiry in the first place: Why is there Being at all, rather than Nothing?  By in effect conceiving of a metaphysical order without (post-Platonic Western) metaphysics, Heidegger hoped to enhance our ability to understand reality.
	Heidegger (2000) also provided philosophical elaboration of the the changing attitude toward truth resonating throughout our culture.  Heidegger challenged the correspondence theory of truth, by which a proposition is regarded as true if and only if it corresponds with reality.  It is easy to see why ancient philosophers gravitated toward this conception of truth—the propositional symbolic form was still new,  its epistemic potential untapped, and the purpose of philosophy was to discover what it is capable of doing epistemically.  With a couple thousand years of distance, Heidegger noted that this understanding of truth supplanted an older understanding of truth.  Philosophy ever since the classical period had been asking the same questions over and over, and the rate of its production of knowledge had steadily declined ever since antiquity.  Heidegger hearkened back to the symbolic state that preceded the emergence of philosophy (and was thus the environment in which people first decided to start asking philosophical questions).  This is the reason he was so concerned with discovering long lost understandings of metaphysics and epistemology.  
	Heidegger discovered what he believed was a more originary conception of truth by way of an etymological analysis of its Greek signifier, al?theia (???????).  He noted that the word consisted an alpha prefixed to a derivative of the word l?th? (????), a verb which means to be concealed.  In Greek, as in English, when the first letter of the alphabet is used as a prefix, it is usually privative, signifying the absence of what follows (e.g., atypical, amoral, etc.).  Thus, before truth was understood in terms of propositional correspondence, according to Heidegger, it was understood as disclosure or unhiddeness.  One reason why Heidegger preferred this understanding of truth is that our experience of so many different symbolic orders and corresponding worldviews forced us to abandon the notion that reality is ultimately composed of signified entities that exactly and exhaustively match our signifiers.  Consequently, our attempts to create a symbolic mirror image of everything we know about the world can only lead us to distorted perceptions of the world (for example, viewing sanity or insanity as opposed categories instead of as ends of spectra).
Rhetoric and Institutions
	Heidegger's concept of truth as disclosure is important to understanding the unfolding of meaning in psychiatric knowledge.  The ongoing unconcealment of truth offers a way to understand how the rhetorical residues of the past become hybridized with contemporary symbols to disclose new meanings.  Meaning is an infinite and inexhaustible surplus that is limited only by the symbolic forms we have at our disposal.  Of course, sometimes symbolic forms are incompatible with one another.  As a field of knowledge develops, it requires the development of new symbolic forms as well as the redactive integration of old symbolic forms into a cohesive scheme.
Rhetorical Institutionalism
	The institutional structure of a field of knowledge depends upon the integration of symbolic forms.  In modern societies, institutions play a crucial role in this integration.  In other words, institutions perform an architectonic function.  Just as speech was formalized into writing, both of which are rhetorical, speech and writing developed into formal social structure, the institution, which too is a rhetorical form.  Institutions serve as the sites of interaction between the material and symbolic worlds within which humans cooperate with one another.  Institutions are traditionally studied by sociologists, the “science of institutions, their genesis and their functioning” (Durkheim, 1982, p. 45).  Although an institution is a structure of social order, and can manifest in physical buildings and written documents, an institution qua institution has no physical/material existence, nor is it symbolically represented ideas or concepts (although in some cases they are formally organized in law).  Rather, as Mead (1967) explains, an institution is “nothing but an organization of attitudes which we carry in us, the organized attitudes of the others that control and determine our conduct... The institution represents a common response on the part of all members of the community to a particular situation” (pp. 211; 261).  According to Giddens (1979), institutions “form a consensual backdrop against which action is negotiated and meanings formed...  Institutions...may be regarded as 'standardized modes of behavior' which play a basic part in the time-space constitution of social systems” (pp. 50; 96).  Furthermore, “every competent member of every society knows a great deal about the institutions of that society” (p. 71).  
	Is the DSM an institution?  If it is, it is of a fixed kind, changing only when formally revised.  Yet institutions are always changing:
Nothing comes from nothing: new institutions can only be created from old ones... True institutions live, that is, change incessantly; the rules of action are neither understood nor applied in the same manner at successive moments, even though the formulae in which they are expressed remain literally the same. (Mauss, 2005, p. 11)
This suggests that the DSM is an institutional canon (from the Greek kan?n [?????], meaning measure, standard, or rule), that contains the formulae that express the rules of action, the meaning of which in practice constitutes the actual institution.  Additionally, while many people have heard of the DSM and have a passing familiarity with, if nothing else, the names of some of the most common disorders, it would not be accurate to say every competent member of our society knows a great deal about the DSM.  I suggest that the DSM serves as an institutional anchor into two distinct lifeworlds: one common to most in society, and the other common to clinicians—a clinical lifeworld.  While the activities of the clinic are part of the medical system and thus part of the systems world, medicine is a practical art, and clinicians themselves are not usually engaged in the same enterprise as medical researchers.
Social Knowledge
	As I've explained, the emergence and mutation of symbolic forms were integral to the development of culture.  Culture consists of the set of knowledge from which a collective of communicating people can develop ways to interpret their experiences meaningfully so that they can understand the world of objects, as the “natural world, as we experience it, is not identical to the one known to physics but is culturally constructed” (Sonesson, 2001).  In that sense, culture helps people satisfy their need for meaning and understanding, which I have explained before is innate.  Humans have other needs, of course.  First and foremost is the biological imperative to survive and reproduce.  For that reason, communities come together to form society so that they can cooperate to solve their material goals.  Like culture, a society can only come about through communication.  Without communication, individuals would not be able to cooperate to solve mutual goals, for several reasons.  First, they must be able to trust one another.  In primitive communities, individuals could trust each other because they were bound together by kinship relations.  In order for non-biologically related individuals to trust one another, they needed to demonstrate to one another that their behavior was guided by a consensual agreement about normative rules of behavior.
	An animal in the wild must always be fearful of strange animals, because any unknown animal could pose a danger.  If they had some way to predict whether certain other animals would not attack them, they could let their guard down.  Humans are the same way – but by means of communication, humans can express to one another that they will not behave violently toward one another. The cooperative act of communication initially instantiates this because, in order to communicate, all parties must follow a set of shared rules. In other words, there must be a collective pool of social knowledge, which
comprises conceptions of symbolic relationships among problems, persons, interests, and actions, which imply (when accepted) certain notions of preferable public behavior...  Social knowledge... acquires its rhetorical function when it is assumed to be shared by knowers in their unique capacity as audience (Farrell, 1976, p. 4, emphasis in original).
Both social knowledge and the shared assumption that it is shared—awareness of shared values and norms, of the objectively real world of objects, and of individual personalities in which occurs similar subjective experiences of the world—exist in and constitute the lifeworld, the “horizon within which communicative actions are 'always already' moving, [which] is... limited and changed by the structural transformation of society as a whole” (Habermas, 1987, p. 119).  There is no meaning outside the lifeworld, for the ways in which we are aware of ourselves and the world depend entirely on this collectively constructed lifeworld.  Only having access to the subjective world of experience, one's  awareness of material objects is limited to interactions mediated by instinct and sense perception.  
	The development of symbolic communication made it possible for humans to comprehend material objects that exist within “one and the same world for a community of speaking and action subjects” (Habermas, 1984, pp. 12–13).  This occurs within the lifeworld, a shared horizon of understanding.  The concept of the lifeworld was first defined by Husserl:
In whatever way we may be conscious of the world as a universal horizon, as a coherent universe of existing objects, we, each “I-the-man” and all of us together, belong to the world as living with one another in the world; and the world is our world, valid for our consciousness as existing precisely through this ‘living together.’  We, as living in wakeful world-consciousness, are constantly active on the basis of our passive having of the world... Obviously this is true not only for me, the individual ego; rather we, in living together, have the world pre-given in this together, belong, the world as world for all, pre-given with this ontic meaning... The we-subjectivity... [is] constantly functioning. (Husserl, 1970, pp. 108–109)
Although everything we perceive arranged throughout time and space is filtered through the lifeworld, we are not conscious of its operation, as it is the completely taken-for-granted experience of the world.  
	To us, the world seems objective, which is to say that it exists outside of ourselves, not within our minds but out there for everyone to see.  But even this
anticipated unanimity of experience... presupposes a community of others who are deemed to be observing the same world, who are physically constituted so as to be capable of veridical experience, who are motivated so as to speak ‘truthfully’ of their experience, and who speak according to recognizable, shared schemes of expression. (p. 47)
Though it feels like a subjective process, it is actually intersubjective because it is shared with everyone in our society.  This lifeworld is “the world as we immediately experience it pre-reflectively rather than as we conceptualize, categorize, or reflect on it” (van Manen, 1990, p. 9).  In other words, the lifeworld is the constant everyday experience that all humans have and take for granted; it is a common horizon of knowing (Todorov, 1984).  
	The lifeworld does not represent a pre-linguistic reality; even basic pre-reflective sensory experience is culturally dependent, which has been demonstrated dramatically by Henrich et al. (2010), who compared people from WEIRD societies (that is, societies that are western, educated, industrialized, rich, and democratic) to people from non-WEIRD societies, and found that WEIRD people are “frequent outliers” in terms of “visual perception, fairness, cooperation, spacial reasoning, categorization and inferential induction, moral reasoning, reasoning styles, self-concepts and related motivations, and the heritability of IQ” (p. 61).  We don't even perceive optical illusions in the same way, a powerful demonstration of the way in which every experience we have comes to us within the lifeworld.  This is true even of our experience of ourselves—without the lifeworld, there is no world of differentiated objects, and so there are no individuals.  Within the lifeworld, however, individuals have an internal subjective experience of the world, recognizing themselves as subjects, an 'I.'  Through a series of language games with other members of her society, the individual recognizes herself as an object, a 'me' (Mead, 1967).  
Connecting System and Lifeworld
	This extended discussion of the lifeworld may seem like a tangent, but it is absolutely critical to understanding psychiatric institutions in the late modern world.  These institutions structure our lifeworld by regulating our behavior and infusing our perceptions of events with normative judgment.  As will become clear in Chapter 3, this is something that contemporary institutions inherited from past social structures of expertise: The humoral model of pathology that dominated Western medicine from Hippocrates to the end of the eighteenth century systematically structured the lifeworld of the West.  Subjects do not experience the institutional logics that structure their lifeworld simply as pressures to act one way or another to avoid punishment or violating a taboo.  Rather, the horizon of potential decisions and behaviors is limited: “Compliance occurs in many circumstances because other types of behavior are inconceivable; routines are followed because they are taken for granted as 'the way we do these things'” (W. R. Scott, 2014, p. 57).
	Institutions come from our need to cooperate.  Cooperation requires that the actions of individuals be coordinated in an organized fashion, and action coordination requires linguistic communication.  As some people are better suited to do certain tasks than others, a society must divide up the tasks.  Durkheim (1997) observed: “Social life is derived from a dual source, the similarity of individual consciousnesses [the lifeworld] and the social division of labor” (p. 172).
	Initially, communities function as singular instrumental systems in which all action is steered by linguistic communication within their lifeworlds, which were coextensive with their systems.  As they grow, however, they  begin to divide into groups with different functions.  This trend toward differentiation must be balanced by measures of integration that keep the community from breaking into pieces.  The norms of behavior that brought the community together in the first place must be codified into laws that are binding on all members.  Further, as people differentiate into separate groups, the functions of and relationships between these groups also must be codified into law.  Durkheim suggested that the role of law in a society was similar to the role of a nervous system in an organism:
That system, in effect, has the task of regulating the various bodily functions in such a way that they work harmoniously together.  Thus it expresses in a very natural way the degree of concentration that the organism has reached as a result of the physiological division of labor... [We] can ascertain the measure of concentration that a society has reached through the social division of labor, according to the development of co-operative law with its restitutory sanctions. (p. 83).
In this way, even though system and lifeworld decouple, the consensual norms of the community are institutionalized into law.  
	As the community continues to enlarge and become more complex, the amount of linguistic effort necessary for each system of organizations to steer itself becomes too great a burden.  A very small group of people faced with the task of allocating scarce resources can accomplish this by talking it out in order to figure out who needs what resources, and with them what they are to accomplish for the society.  A larger social system of exchange cannot talk this sort of thing out, and instead must develop a delinguistified medium of communication—money.  As members of the society accomplish tasks for others, they receive money from them, which they then can use to get from others what they need; use value becomes exchange value.  In order for this to work, people have to trust one another to honor systemic interactions mediated by money.  Norms must emerge and become codified into law.  
	At this point, the society now has a basic market within which people's behavior, and the behavior they expect from others, are regulated institutionally.  The basic function of an institution is to anchor the steering media of systems to the lifeworld, which at this point is divided structurally. Habermas (1987) explains:
Under the functional aspect of mutual understanding, communicative action serves to transmit and renew cultural knowledge; under the aspect of coordinating action, it serves social integration and the establishment of solidarity; finally under the aspect of socialization, communicative action serves the formation of personal identities... The process of reproduction connects up new situations with the existing conditions of the lifeworld; it does this in the semantic dimension of meanings or contents (of the cultural tradition), as well as in the dimensions of social space (of socially integrated groups), and historical time (of successive generations).  Corresponding to these processes of cultural reproduction, social integration, and socialization are the structural components of the lifeworld: culture, society, person. (pp. 137-138, emphasis in original)
The legal institution functions as a meta-institution because through codification in law, new institutional relationships become legally binding.  A consequence of the institutional relationship between system and lifeworld is that whenever there is a new problem requiring a new subsystem (or any sort of increased systemic complexity), the new systemic development must be anchored institutionally in the  lifeworld, where it becomes rationalized.  
	Institutions embody 'rationality structures' developed within culture which opens space for new forms of rationalizing action to be discovered. In this way, society becomes an evolutionary learning process, as institutions become engines of progress within which technical systems can incorporate aspects of cultural products—initially worldviews—into systemic innovation aimed at a major goal of society.  This marks the emergence of the modern world.  
Institutional Canon
	While less formalized systems can be slow to adapt to the rhetorical challenges they face, formal systems make use of canonical texts that buttress the system's authority, and which can be changed in an instant if necessary.  Canonical texts are renewable resources in which one may find backing for appeals to authority and to the 'normal' or the 'natural.'   Normalization only works when it is understood well enough to regulate behavior and belief while remaining perfectly invisible.  The canonical texts work best when lay members of the public can understand them well enough to know what is required of them—one must understand a text at least enough to know what it justifies—but not well enough to understand the reasons for their declarations, or the means to challenge them on their own ground.  This balancing act, being sufficiently clear to attract diffuse public support (achieved communicatively in the public sphere) while preventing outsiders from participating in the systems' internal deliberation about the operation of its institutions (located almost entirely in the technical sphere), can be difficult to achieve, particularly during the process of amending one's canonical text, an act that requires greater legitimation.  
	Were the public able to participate fully in the technical discourse of a system, contradictions in the prevailing social logic would become apparent.   To militate against this outcome, “the administrative system must be sufficiently independent of legitimating will-formation” (Habermas, 1975, p. 36).  The challenge in psychiatry is made much more difficult by the communicative nature of its treatment: Both psychotherapy and the prescription of psychoactive drugs work much better when the patient thinks he or she understands how they work.  Social systems must accomplish both social integration and systemic integration, and their survival depends on their “capacity to maintain their boundaries and their continued existence by mastering the complexity of an inconstant environment” (p. 4).
	A social movement can provoke a legitimation crisis by successfully demonstrating the contradictions of the otherwise taken-for-granted institutions.  If the legitimacy of a particular order can be justified by appealing to its authoritative text, so can the de-legitimation of that order if countervailing social movements can explain why the text supports their critique.  It is no surprise that the Protestant Revolution centered around sola scriptura, a doctrine that challenged the nature and authority of the Bible as read and interpreted by the Catholic Church.  Likewise, atheists often appeal to scripture when they proselytize.27  In any event, authoritative texts and the discourse surrounding their production are battleground sites among internal forces in a system.  The contradictions do not need to derive from entirely internal conflicts (e.g., in psychiatry, the conflict between the psychoanalytic and biological approaches, discussed in Chapter 1).  
	Systems often deal with steering problems by soliciting the aid of other systems which have distinct and even somewhat conflicting imperatives.  A social movement can critique an institution effectively by demonstrating that its legitimacy is derived from an external system.  Like all systems in late capitalism, psychiatry is deeply connected to other instrumental systems. It is regulated by the FDA, which manages the definition of an illness and the means by which it may be treated, by the market, which produces new treatments in order to make a profit, and by clinicians, who translate and apply the definitions and treatments to individual patients.  Psychiatry is more a network of systemic interactions and an environment housing a rhetorical economy than a system proper.  
	Psychiatry enlists the aid of these other systems to prevent an identity or steering crisis: Government regulation of the same sort applied to other medical fields provides it with a great deal of authority, as do the biological explanations of mental disorders provided by scientists who are enabled by the pharmaceutical industry, which also enables clinicians to use the newly developed treatments 'effectively.'  But psychiatry also helps these systems achieve their own imperatives by providing their actors with social capital: to pharmacologists, a justification for their work and their status as experts; to pharmaceutical companies, a market within which its goods may be sold; to society at large, which has become increasingly secular and correspondingly more and more focused on health.  
	Healy (1997) argues that the medicalization of the 'problems of living' has performed a legitimation function in supporting this move, and as a result, scientific crises in psychiatry have the potential to contribute to biopolitical legitimation crises in society at large.  During the 1970s, the use of minor tranquilizers to treat anxiety was a frequent topic of discussion in both art and in mass media, often appearing in news stories clustered with discussions of the unhealthy (pun intended) relationship between the scientific basis of psychiatry and the pharmaceutical industry.  In the 1990s, the use of fluoxetine and other SSRIs became culturally significant, especially with publications like Listening to Prozac.  
	Stable texts provide social movements with an opportunity to demonstrate contradictions because, if a canonical text  is meaningful at all, it is likely that there are internal contradictions as well as contradictions between the text and actual practice.  It is more difficult to demonstrate that a moving target contradicts, but for the same reasons it is difficult to appeal to an instable authority.  Likewise, if an authoritative text can be changed on a whim, appeals to it become less persuasive as it seems to be little more than a contingent set of opinions. For this reason, canonical texts tend to be most effective when there is a formalized mechanism with which they can be amended that is simple enough that it can be understood by the public to not be completely arbitrary, but complex enough that the opponents of the institution have little to no ability to access it themselves.  
	One may speak of the U. S. Constitution as a 'living document,' which for the sake of posterity establishes a process of amendment that is difficult but not impossible to use.  Similarly, the Christian Bible is open to revision, though less openly: It can be retranslated or modified (as when Martin Luther removed the deuterocanonical books from the Old Testament).  Barring that, the church also may alter its meaning as an institutional text by calling ecumenical councils that can be doctrinal or pastoral.  Successful or not, a powerful institution facing a powerful social movement, their interactions and strategies for co-opting one another's rhetoric while defending themselves from the same, are all reflected in the change over time in a canonical text and the discourse surrounding those changes.  
	In A Grammar of Motives, Burke (1969a) discusses at length the way in which a constitution works, and is well aware of the danger posed by linguistic contradiction:
[Let] us assume some body of men living in a complex but relatively stable political and economic order.  And let us suppose that the philosophy advocated by one of the schools became “implemented” as the authoritative vocabulary for rationalizing the culture's acts, institutions, relationships, and expectancies.  Here a new kind of ambiguity would arise.  For the vocabulary of the unofficial schools would implicitly or explicitly contain different programs of action with respect to political and economic issues than would the official vocabulary.  (In brief, the grammatical resources would take on rhetorical implications.)  And such doctrinal differences, when sharpened by their direct or indirect bearing on the political and economic agon, would in time come to be felt not simply as differences, but as antitheses. (p. 103)
Though Burke dismisses the importance of formal amendment rather flippantly (“We need not complicate matters by considering amendments”) he argues that one way in which a symbolic order protects itself from its contradictions is by lending itself to reinterpretation by a competent impartial actor, as the Supreme Court can do “without waiting for the unwieldy process of amendment prescribed in the Constitution” (p. 197, 387).  Just as a social movement can challenge an institution by demonstrating its contradictions, so can an institution defend itself from a social movement by capitalizing on its contradictions.  The more specific the contradictions are, the more they serve the social movement, while the more vague they are, the more they can be used effectively by the institution to defend itself (though obviously the authority of an institution must not be so vague that it cannot be used credibly to prescribe or proscribe).  One can accomplish this by valorizing two seemingly opposed dialectical terms.  Indeed the Supreme Court derives its legitimacy from “the ambiguities and contradictions arising from the nature of the Constitution itself” (p. 388).  
	The psychiatric medical system is instrumental.  One of its functions is to regulate the way in which individuals subjectively experience society and behave according to its norms.  It controls the supplement, which it administers according to its expertise.  The definition and treatment of mental disorders enables psychiatry as a system to steer society.  This relies primarily on two institutions: the concept of 'mental illness,' and the methods of its treatment, primarily the authority to prescribe psychoactive drugs.  Through these institutions, it  produces a standardized response to a situation it defines: mental illness.  By producing the terms with which one may communicate about mental illness, psychiatry controls to some extent the way in which society thinks about mental health and the treatment of mental disorders.  It is coercive in several ways.  Though very uncommon and extremely limited now, psychiatrists historically have been given by the state the authority to incarcerate people who they regard as mentally ill, forcing them to ingest consciousness-changing psychoactive drugs, and disciplining them by compelling them to self-identify with a mental health diagnosis.  This is the primary type of coercion resisted by the anti-psychiatry movement.  A further way in which psychiatry is coercive is that it serves as the gatekeeper of psychiatric medicine: One may only have access to an antidepressant, for example, with the blessing of a psychiatrist.  This is one coercive power around which the consumer or ex-patient movement is constituted.  Both forms of coercion rely on the power to define; psychiatrists treat 'patients' who they diagnose with a 'mental disorder.'  To a large extent, psychiatrists require that those 'patients' agree with those definitions before they permit them to accomplish some goal (e.g., obtaining release from incarceration, obtaining a prescription for Prozac, etc.).
	The language of an institution is technical.  It is difficult for the public to resist its presence without fluency in an institution's internal communication. It is difficult to convince the public to oppose a system that they cannot understand.  People need reasons to oppose powerful systems, and it helps if those reasons are good reasons, reasons they can defend despite their inability to comprehend their technical complexity.  Who am I to argue with a scientist about science?  Although institutions have a public dimension, they legitimate systems by serving as a site of interaction between the technical sphere and the private sphere, a deeply personal relationship to that system that cannot be challenged publicly.  
	In the case of psychiatry, the privacy of the doctor-patient dyad is untouchable, with sufficient legal protection that not even a judge can compel doctors to discuss their interactions with their patients publicly.  In pre-modern times, the Church enjoyed mass loyalty by virtue of its putative ability to overcome sins, which it defined.  Sin in general was a matter of public discussion, but one's particular sins were discussed only in the private confessional.  Both sin and the sacrament of confession were institutions by which the Church as an instrumental system embedded itself in the lifeworld.  The various contradictions associated with sin—the problem of evil, the seemingly God-given inclination to sin, the sinful nature of fallible church leaders, conflicting moral duties, etc.—were difficult to point out without being able to discuss the contradictions between the public and private functions of sin.  In any event, psychiatric social movements, like many social movements, can undermine an institution by drawing what was once technical along with what was once personal into the public sphere (K. M. Olson & Goodnight, 1994).
Rhetoric and Practice
	Traditionally, financial economists have focused on the material at the expense of the symbolic (R. H. Brown, 1987; Goodnight & Green, 2010; Graff & Birkenstein, 2007; McCloskey, 1994, 1997, 1998, 2002, 2010; Szenberg & Ramrattan, 2004).  The opposite error is committed when the material is neglected in the study of human symbol use.  Sahlins (1972) advanced this argument in support of his rejection of the “procrustean opposition of 'idealism' and 'materialism' by which the discussion customarily proceeds” (p. ix).  This suggests the desirability of speculative interdisciplinary work that examines material economic phenomena in terms of their symbolic and communicative components, as well as work that examines symbolic and communicative phenomena in terms of their material economic components (Aune, 2001, 2003, 2006, 2009; Cloud, 1994, 2002; Cloud, Macek, & Aune, 2006; Greene, 1998, 2004, 2007).  
	A market is an instrumental system of action in which scarce resources are allocated as efficiently as possible. To do so, its rationality is mediated by a delinguistified medium of communication—money.  That is, scarce resources are allocated through the exchange of money.  Left to its own devices, the market would steer social intercourse divorced from the shared norms and values that constitute and integrate modern society.  However, it is anchored to the lifeworld institutionally.  Thus, it can be seen to have two modalities: system (various interlinked markets) and institution (legal, financial, professional, etc.).  Institutions themselves operate in an institutional environment inhabited by other institutions.  Market actors (both individuals and organizations) are driven by the need to survive and reproduce, and to do so, they must accomplish material ends in markets while establishing and maintaining legitimacy within and through institutions.
	Thus, a market is an action systems steered by the exchange of money between individuals whose behavior is standardized and regulated by an organized set of attitudes shared by all market actors.  In the late modern world, this organized set of attitudes and predictable behaviors comprises the global economy as an institution.  Within this institution the material technical operation of the market merges with the symbolic rationalization of culture and the norms of society.  A market and its corresponding institution are similar in that they both do their work through communication.  Markets operate according to a logic (or sometimes competing logics) dictated by their steering medium and oriented toward accomplishing technical goals (Friedland & Alford, 1991; Lounsbury, 2007; P. H. Thornton, 2002).  Although individuals intentionally set up markets and create formal organizations called 'institutions,' by and large both markets and institutions are emergent phenomena.  They develop intersubjectively, self-organizing their functions well beyond the conscious intentions of any of the individuals involved.
	Their differences, however, are significant.  A market is an action system, while an institution is essentially a framework within which the lifeworld can influence a market (by forcing market actors to obey societal norms and by orienting market production and consumption toward the shared values of society) and the market can influence society by distorting the communicative action that steers the lifeworld.  The institutional arrangement is the product of systemic interaction between the state and the economy, as the legal constitution of the institution is backed by the power of the state.  Institutions operate according to institutional logics, according to which interactions within the institution function.
Ideas Market
	A market is an open system that cannot be understood inductively, which is to say its behavior cannot be predicted with certainty.  This is particularly the case now, as its systemic complexity is growing at a rate too fast to be rationalized by individuals through their institutional economic relationships.  Markets stay relatively stable when there is a high degree of trust among and between their actors, which also entails trust in the market's steering medium.  Too much uncertainty in these areas can cause individuals to behave decidedly irrationally, as they lack any institutional logic to govern their economic decisions and behavior.  All of this is amplified by the reflexivity of late modernity – institutional knowledge produced by economists designed to predict future market behavior on the basis of interactions in the past becomes embedded in the market itself, rendering the prediction void, further restricting the circumference around which they make act rationally. The increasing number and complexity of institutional linkages between market participants amplifies this effect.  The more the outcome of one actor's actions is connected to those of others, the more vulnerable the market is to swings.  The negative consequences of error can spiral out of control, leading the market toward disequilibrium.  There is a maximum safe amount of leveraging beyond which economic disaster is inevitable.  Furthermore, structural disincentives associated with short selling favor isomorphisms between bullish investors over those between bearish investors.
	This is a danger posed by coordinating regimes like the DSM.  Psychiatry, as a scientific field, is a market of ideas.  Good ideas, ideas which are productive of knowledge, are valuable.  If someone believes an idea is undervalued – that is, it has a lot of potential to produce new knowledge but currently is not being pursued by any major research program – then they should invest (time, financial resources, intellectual energy) in that idea by initiating a line of research around it.  When scientists write grants, they have a lot in common with fundamentals analysts on Wall Street.  Their rhetorical efforts must be directed at convincing funding authorities and colleagues that the idea they want to pursue has potential.  In a free market of ideas, bad ideas lose to good ideas.  Unfortunately, there is no such thing as a free market.
	The recent financial crisis suggests that uncertainty and confusion are in some way built into markets.  Buchanan (2008) explains that financial instrument complexity prevented market participants, whose rationality was constrained by inadequate banking regulations, from accurately calculating the risk inherent in those instruments.  Moreover, the market was structured in such a way that separated the short-term benefits achievable by single influential actors from the risks associated with those benefits, risks that nonetheless were taken by organizations, against their own interest (but in the interest of single individual decision-makers within the organization).  Those risks were further obscured by ‘collateralized debt obligations,’ which were then bought and sold by market actors who were not able correctly to calculate the risk associated with those assets.  A third way in which uncertainty about risk became built into the market is through the process of leveraging—hedge funds borrow money from banks in order to capitalize on market inefficiencies.  Banks charge interest on those loans in order to make a profit, and that interest has to be proportional to the risk that the loan will not be repaid, which is why individuals with poor credit can only get loans that come with extremely high interest.  The more that hedge funds leverage their investments, the more risk banks become exposed to – and when banks lose money in the aggregate, it becomes more expensive for anyone in the market to borrow money.  Buchanan (2008) points to recent models that suggest that when leverage reaches a certain critical point, the market becomes completely unstable, as single mistakes (which are inevitable) ripple through the market, creating cascades of failures throughout the entire system.
	The field of psychiatric nosology has encountered similar problems.  The DSM-III revolution I described in Chapter 1 resulted from the widespread belief that the complexity of psychodynamic etiological theories had advanced beyond the capacity of psychiatrists to deploy them reliably.  An institutional legitimation crisis is like a market crash in this analogy.  The new market order created by DSM-III, however, led to a great deal of leveraging, as theoretical constructs were homogenized into a multi-axial categorical system, and collateralized disease entities emerged that covered over heterogeneous phenomena, like the decision in DSM-III-R to fold all variants of depression into one major depressive disorder.28  It is in this context that Allen Frances could speak of diagnostic 'bubbles' like attention deficit / hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) or childhood bipolar disorder (Frances, 2011b, 2013).
	Classical economics assumed that market actors were rational optimizers.  As it turns out, market actors often merely copy one another mimetically, and rather than optimize, they are willing to accept less than optimal performance as long as it satisfies certain minimum needs. Simon (1991) suggested that there are “limits upon the ability of human beings to adapt optimally, or even satisfactorily, to complex environments” (p. 132).  Against the hypothesis that humans always attempt to maximize utility based on the knowledge available to them, Simon (1978) maintained that any theory of rationality “must be quite as much concerned with the characteristics of rational actors – the means they use to cope with uncertainty and cognitive complexity – as with characteristics of the objective environments in which they make their decisions” (pp. 8-9).  What is particularly surprising is that this behavior happens even when uncertainty is minimized.  According to Levine and Zajac (2007), in times of complete informational certainty, individual market actors take behavioral cues from others, and when asked to explain the reasons behind their positions, they seemed unaware of this mimesis.  Likewise, isomorphisms develop in institutional environments as organizations mime one another's structure, management techniques, and strategies (DiMaggio & Powell, 1983).  As a result, the success or failure of each organization becomes correlated with that of others, increasing the possibility of great swings.
Signification Exchange
	The behavior of any member of society is influenced by the structures of that society, structures which are continually reproduced by the actions of individuals.  Values play a role in both sides of this reflexive loop—on the micro level, values motivate the conduct of individuals (the values can include artificial 'needs' mediated communicatively from the market through art into the consciousness of individuals), while, at the macro level, values work as institutionalized norms (which regulate the market) to form a moral consensus that integrates individuals and structures into a social unity.  The signification of value is linguistically structured, and as Giddens (1993) notes, “language at the same time expresses aspects of domination; and the codes that are involved in signification have normative force” (pp. 106-107).  In addition to signification and domination, legitimation also structures institutional relationships.  Giddens divides institutions into four categories: symbolic orders or modes of discourse, political institutions, economic institutions, and legal institutions and other modes of sanction.  Of course, these institutional forms are all integrated together, and together they mediate system structure and language.  
	Symbolic orders and modes of discourse are institutional forms that organize signification, assigning meaning to cultural needs and to market products.  Symbolic orders provide a surplus of meaning, as symbols can relate terms literally or through a variety of tropes, e.g., metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, irony, etc.  Linguistic signification influences and is influenced by forms of domination and legitimation.  Political institutions and economic institutions organize domination, which shares an interdependence with signification.  As an example, consider the situation when two individuals exchange money for work.  This could be signified in terms of exploitation or free exchange.  Additional signifiers like contract, wage, and labor further enable and constrain the meaning of the situation.  Those significations then are interdependent with legitimation, as they each entail rationalized relationships regulated by social norms (codified into law) that guide the behavior of both parties.  Legal institutions organize legitimation, which is interrelated with domination, as when one entity dominates another through a lawsuit that all parties agree to accept.  Legal institutions essentially contain a web of intersecting codified norms, which may be appealed to by one attempting to dominate another through a relationship that everyone in the society living under the law will accept.  As meaning is produced culturally, it is constituted and communicated into normative sanctions.  Both meanings and norms can be attached to transactions of power, through which a member of society can sanction the behavior of another, resist the efforts of another attempting to sanction him, or infuse his actions with meaning to which others must yield.
Epistemic Bubbles
	I would like to make a final point about late modern technical systems and the associated institutions that anchor them into the lifeworld within a broader rhetorical economy.  Though other instrumental systems are not organized around the production of wealth, they all have an instrumental end.  In order to achieve that end efficiently, actors search for strategies of action that can accomplish the end with the least amount of time and resources.  Once they discover such a strategy, they need to communicate its value to other actors in the system, so that they can 'invest' in it.  This communication occurs in two ways.  First, within the system, it occurs through its delinguistified communication medium with which it is steered.  Second, within the institution, value is signified within discourse, as actors try to convince one another to trust them.  
	The promotion of a specific psychiatric or nosological theory requires the accumulation of confirmatory data, as well as rationalization among other system actors (that is, other psychiatrists) and by members of the public, who form mental models of the theories.  On the basis of those mental models, individuals will decide how they ought to behave given the new knowledge, including the decision materially or ideologically to support or oppose the scientists behind it.  In any event, new theoretical and methodological development requires an investment related to the system's steering media, provided with the hope that it will deliver a large return (in the case of psychiatric science, this is in the form of knowledge about the varieties of madness and their treatment).
      I'd like to describe this ‘activity’ as a rhetorical search activity.  This keeps it general and tied to the literature on bounded rationality, as well as to Kuhn's (1962) theory of paradigmatic revolutions in science.  In terms of a ‘search,’ both the borrower and the lender bet that the borrower will find a technique permitting her to pay back the loan before the money runs out. When the cost of borrowing is low, the lender takes on more risk, predicting that this technique will be found.  When it thinks that the technique will be harder to find, it pushes risk onto the borrower by raising rates.  Thus, an expansion in the money supply can be seen as the source of a special, macro-economic case of an institutional belief that new discoveries are forthcoming.  This belief is marked by the distribution of discovery risk away from discoverer and onto lender/patron of discovery.  Necessarily, when this risk is shifted, borrowers respond.  When the money supply expands, borrowers can afford to take more risks.  But whether this leads to bubbles has to do with what kinds of things, if any, they find with their searches, rather than simple fact that they search more.  I would hypothesize that expansions in the money supply lead to bubbles when what is found by borrowers are rhetorical techniques for exploiting information asymmetries (between borrower and lender) rather than productive techniques that increase knowledge.  A pyramid scheme is just one such rhetorical technique.  No-principle loans are another (note, the asymmetry here is between mortgage broker as borrower and Wall Street as lender, with home-owner as an evidentiary pawn in the rhetorical game).  Bubbles would occur when the money supply expands and the ratio of discoverable information asymmetries to productive techniques is high.  Instead of investing capital in a productive way, people instead use it to search for superior strategies of effective deceit.
	Thus, we may casuistically stretch the money supply concept to generalized epistemic institutional contexts, and with it, we can stretch the concept of asset bubbles to generalized “epistemic bubbles” (Strait, 2012, p. 5).  In order to do so, we must discover parallels to the linkages entailed in markets that contain high amounts of leveraging.  Interconnectedness is problematic for markets when the negative consequences of investing in poor search strategies are felt too widely across the entire market.  Since this in and of itself does not require the steering media of money, this phenomenon can occur in institutions in which organizational actors are so closely connected that the mistakes of one actor result in negative downstream consequences for the entire institution.  Just as with markets, we should expect this process to be non-linear.
	With each new edition of the DSM, the psychiatric nosological 'money supply' expands, as the market is flooded with a plethora of institutionally recognized but under-researched objects of knowledge.  Pharmaceutical companies can have a field day in this environment, which is what occurred after DSM-III gave them several new diseases to brand (Gambrill, 2012; Healy, 1997).  Changing the DSM provides the rhetorical resources to exploit information asymmetries between market participants, particularly between industry affiliated researchers, on one hand, and physicians, patients, and regulators, on the other.  Interconnectedness makes the nosological idea market vulnerable to swings in either direction.  If the coordination provided by DSM hits on fruitful concepts, the idea market will swing upward; if it contains epistemic dead-ends or overly risky diagnoses, the result can be negative.  Of course, other factors at play prevent the market from becoming overly leveraged, like the NIMH's decision to pursue the dimensional diagnostic concepts they had hoped would be included in DSM-5 (Datta, 2013; Paris, 2013a).  The DSM offers just one nosological perspective within an “economy of DSM alternatives,” though it has a competitive advantage due to the “mental health medical-industrial complex (MHMIC)”  (Sadler, 2013, p. 21).  Sadler is hopeful that “NIMH's interest in the RDoC idea signals a new responsiveness to other and more alternatives to the DSM.  Perhaps the DSM-5 idea about a 'living document' may lead to support for 'open source' classifications of disorder... Only time will tell” (p. 34).
Rhetoric as Polytechtonic Art
	In Chapter 1, I proposed the concept of a polytechtonic rhetorical economy, which integrates the various lines of sociological, anthropological, economic, and rhetorical theories that I have been discussing in this chapter.  The idea begins with McKeon's concept of rhetoric as an “architectonic productive art” that “relates form to matter, instrumentality to product, presentation to content, agent to audience, [and] intention to reason” (McKeon, 1987, p. 24).  In the context of modern institutions, architectonic rhetoric "provides grounding for the intersubjectivity of communications of persons and groups and for the objectivity of conclusions of inquiry and action”; within this deliberative field, “possible worlds, which are discussed in plans and policy, are constructed, and theses which are posited are stabilized into principles” (p. 23).  The idea that a scientific field is like a building under construction can be found in an etymological metaphor, the Greek word for knowledge, epist?m? (????????), which combines the verb hist?mi (??????), meaning 'to make to stand,' and the prefix epi- (???-), meaning 'upon.'  This provides context for understanding the famous words of the ancient physicist Archimedes, who, while reflecting on the concept of leverage and the transformative potential of science, said: “Give me a place to stand [st?], and I will move the world” (as cited in Regnault, 2012, p. 243).29  From this Greek word for standing, “one could build a whole philosophical universe... it would have stables, staffs, staves, stalls, stamens, stamina, stanchions, stanzas, steeds, stools, and studs” (Burke, 1969a, p. 21).  Given the proper topoi, or rhetorical places,30 the art of rhetoric makes a constellation of signifiers stand upon one another.  By linking them together within a internally referential persuasive network, rhetoric builds a scientific field with an architectonic communicative structure.
	The architectural metaphor is useful both for what it does and does not explain.  I contend that a neat structural conception of knowledge fails to characterize contemporary psychiatric science accurately.  In contrast to a single well-ordered building, the field of psychiatry built by the architectons of mental health
resembles the Tower of Babel.  Our psychiatric situation is perhaps even more chaotic than that of the legendary tower, for in that famous example of failed communication, each person was presumably speaking one language consistently, although not the same language as his fellow tower-builders.  What we have in psychiatry is worse: each person uses a hodgepodge of bits and pieces of ideas, theories, notions, and ideologies in order to engage in a supposedly common enterprise with others similarly confused. (Siegler & Osmond, 1974, p. 11)
Written six years before the publication of DSM-III, these words remain true today.  While the DSM functions as an organizing institution, I contend that contemporary psychiatric nosological discourse has “no center, ...no privileged locus of growth, ...and no stable patterns of interconnection among its elements” (Bogue, 2007, p. 127).  Put another way, “in an age characterized by digital material exchange, networks of assembly, and global circulation,” the rhetoric of psychiatry is not architectonic, but “polytechtonic” (Goodnight, 2014, pp. 9, 2).  This corresponds with the shift from early modernity's concern for “the stability and uniformity of Science” to a late modern need to “to protect diversity and adaptability” (Toulmin, 1990, p. 183, emphasis in original).
	The concept of a polytechtonic rhetorical economy encompasses theory, model, argument field (Toulmin, 2003), and paradigm (T. S. Kuhn, 1962), but is less extensive than an episteme (Foucault, 1994).  In contrast to Cassirer's idealism and Kuhn's nominalism (Hacking, 1999), my approach follows Aristotle (1941b) and Habermas (2005) in presupposing epistemic realism (while remaining agnostic with respect to metaphysical questions).  My approach breaks with Toulmin, who positions fields of argument in hierarchy, and with Foucault, who sees epistemic structures as assemblages of control.  Instead, I see scientific discourse as a hybrid body of arguments with material outcomes that require justification for the expenditure of wealth capital (Boltanski & Thévenot, 2006).  Miscommunications occur in the justification process due to ripples and dissonances in the lifeworld:
Rational expressions have the character of meaningful actions, intelligible in their context, through which the actor relates to something in the in the objective world.  The conditions of validity of symbolic expressions refer to a background knowledge intersubjectively shared by the communication community.  Every disagreement presents a challenge of a peculiar sort to this lifeworld background. (Habermas, 1988, p. 13)
This is where the testing and counter-testing of validity claims comes in, as the restoration of a shared understanding “necessary for reasoned agreement requires working through the bases for concern and objection... an exchange of reason-giving and criticism – argumentation” (Goodnight, 2007, p. 96).
Social Systems
	Much like Niklas Luhmann's (1995) conceptualization of a communication system, a rhetorical economy is autopoetic and self-referential.  There are two primary differences between my theory and Luhmann's.  First, my view of rhetoric is less mechanistic than Luhmann's view of communication, and it can account for suasive forms ('in-formation') unrelated to their substantive content ('information').  Luhmann's sociological instincts led him to see the social aspects of communication at the expense of the individual subject, which for Luhmann is not involved in communication qua communication, for “only communication can communicate and... only within such a network of communication is what we understand as action created” (Habermas, 1975; Knodt, 1994; Leydesdorff, 2000; Luhmann, 1992, p. 251, emphasis in original, 1995; Ståhle, 2009).  Second, where Luhmann (like Talcott Parsons [1951] before him) detaches social systems from their materiality, my view of rhetoric is irreducibly material both in terms of its mediation and in terms of the underlying reality that is signified by and invested with meaning through rhetoric (Cesaratto, 2013; de Moraes Netto, 2007).
	The basic problem guiding Luhmann's inquiry concerned the reproductive dynamics of social systems.  In this context, reproduction refers to temporal continuity, that is, a system's ability to maintain a continuous and stable identity over time despite changes in and turnover among its members.  How do social systems reproduce?  Vilfredo Pareto (1935) suggested that a social system's reproduction is a consequence of the reproduction of its members.  Talcott Parsons (1951) rejected this solution because, following Émile Durkheim (1951), he argued that sociological phenomena cannot be reduced to aggregated individual phenomena.  Instead, Parsons suggested that a social system reproduces when its characteristic patterns of action—the social roles available to its members—reproduce.  These patterns of action are “implementations of perspective points, interests, values, and – more generally, of meanings” (Poli, 2010, p. 2).  Luhmann (1986) thus argued that the reproduction of social system is a function of the reproduction of meaning, which happens in communication.  
	Luhmann's model of communication is peculiar in that it does not include subjects.  Following Bühler (1934), Luhmann conceives of communication as a trinity of information (the object that is communicated), utterance (the mechanism of communication), and understanding (the audience's reception of the uttered information).  “Communication,” Luhmann (1995) suggests, “can be conceptualized as a kind of self-excitation that inundates the system with meaning” (p. 171).  A communication system is self-referential because “there is nothing outside of the text” (Derrida, 1974, p. 158).31  Meaning is a distinctive property of communication, and so communication must refer to communication in order to participate in a semiotic chain of meaning.  A self-referential communication system is therefore a relational system.  	
	I want to distinguish between nosological structures, like those proposed and maintained by the DSM, and the semiotic systems involved in their assembly, transformation, and deconstruction.  Luhmann (1995) argues that the difference between structures and systems is that the latter “have boundaries... [which] cannot be conceived without something 'beyond'; thus they presuppose the reality of a beyond and the possibility of transcendence” (p. 28).  We can bracket off the question of whether this distinction is meaningful (it is plainly absurd—a structure is built on the ground, from raw materials and by agents, and is meaningful qua structure by comparison to its disordered or differently-ordered environment).32  Burke (1969a) suggested that a thing's substance, that is, its “characteristic and essential components,” is actually outside of it: “Yet etymologically 'substance' is a scenic word.  Literally, a person's or a thing's sub-stance would be something that stands beneath or supports the person or thing” (pp. 21-22).33  So, a nosological structure (or system—two different words to describe the same thing with a slightly different emphasis) stands on its essential elements, clusters of meaningful associations, transacted through a rhetorical economy, in which those possessing epistemic capital (perhaps after having raised it by pitching it to semiotically wealthy insiders or outsiders) invest in ideas, research programs, and symbols.
Rhetorical Reproduction
	Luhmann borrowed the concept of 'autopoesis' from the biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela, who argued that a living cell is an “autopoietic machine,” that is,
a machine organized (defined as a unity) as a network of processes of production (transformation and destruction) of components which: (i) through their interactions and transformations continuously regenerate and realize the network of processes (relations) that produced them; and (ii) constitute it (the machine) as a concrete unity in space in which they (the components) exist by specifying the topological domain of its realization as such a network. (Maturana & Varela, 1980, pp. 79–80)
Like a living system, a social system manufactures what it needs for reproduction.  Autopoiesis literally means a process of making (poiésis [???????], creation) oneself (auto [????], self).  For Luhmann, a social system's reproduction is coequal with its self-reference, by which social systems “define their specific mode of operation or determine their identity by reflection to be able to regulate which internal meaning-units enable the self-reproduction of the system and thus are repeatedly to be reproduced” (Luhmann, 1995, p. 34).  Since a system of meaning can only refer to itself, it “must adhere to the type of element that the system defines.  To this extent, it is reproduction.  Thus action systems must always produce actions... This is what the self-reference of the elements guarantees.  Certain limits are placed on variation” (p. 35).  But social systems evolve; they do not always stay the same.  This raises another question: how do social systems change?
Evolution or Revolution?
	Autopoietic reproduction of a system of action does not mean that the same actions are repeated continuously—rather, reproduction only requires “production out of what has been produced; for autopoietic systems this means that the system does not end through its actual activity, but goes on... [which depends] on the fact that actions (whether intentionally or not) have communicative value” (p. 169).  New ideas and practices are not created ex nihilo, but in the process of reproduction, change gets introduced into a social system.  
	Stephen Toulmin suggests that useful innovations essentially come into being randomly.  Like Luhmann, Toulmin and Goodfield (1965) see a parallel between social and biological systems, particularly regarding their evolutionary paths:
[The] most profound lesson of Darwin's work is that new creations of great functional significance often come into existence as by-products of processes, all of whose manifest goals lie in quite other directions; and the merits of these novelties depend, not on their conformity to any long-term historical tendency, but on their immediate appropriateness to the particular situation in hand.  This is equally true for both organisms and institutions.  If there is a key to the understanding of all history, it consists in recognizing not its single-directedness, but rather its multiple opportunism. (Toulmin & Goodfield, 1965, p. 235)
In other words, the history of ideas is more a polytechtonic flow than a unidirectional arrow.  On the other hand, the terminologies of science “are not made at random; they follow a definite principle of classification” (Cassirer, 1944, p. 209).  What is random is the rhetorical productivity that a particular form will have in some future hybrid context, as is whether such a context, and not a different one, will present itself.  
	Toulmin (1972) argues that the development of scientific systems occurs through a process of evolution, rather than revolution, as Kuhn (1962) maintained.  Toulmin bases his criticism of Kuhn's theory, which posits incompatible paradigms competing with one another for hegemony, on his theory of field-dependence and field-invariance.  If, Toulmin argued, outside of 'normal science,' two paradigms are truly incommensurate, then they have no basis on which to compete.  This is because interlocutors only may compare conflicting claims that are part of the same field of argument.  For example, if one argues that abortion is impermissible because of the universal patristic witness against the practice, and another argues that it is permissible because of Roe v. Wade, there is no procedure by which the two could weigh the relative merits of those two claims.  Toulmin argued that, just as absolutism over-estimates the degree to which warrants are field-invariant, Kuhn's relativism over-estimates the degree to which warrants are field-dependent.  There are always elements of both at work in any body of discourse—though we would not expect the “standards of argument relevant in a court of law” and those “relevant when judging a paper in the Proceedings of the Royal Society” to be identical, we would expect them to share some logical features and to contain some similar kinds of arguments (Toulmin, 2003, p. 15).  The development of knowledge involves both continuous and discontinuous flows, as new findings, ideas, and symbols from the “intellectual ecology” of a disciplinary field make their way into a larger epistemic structure once place has been made through the culling of “entrenched concepts,” all of which occurs within “forums of competition” in response to forces of symbolic supply and contingent “demand” (Toulmin, 1972, p. 140).
	My view is essentially Toulmin's, with a few modifications.  I follow Foucault's (1994) insight about the parallel nature of the configurations of knowledge across fields, as well as Luhmann's (1986, 1995) conceptions of multiple interlocking systems that refer to one another and of a self-referential system of meaning.  I see the latter essentially as an “ideological cultural system,” that is, an ordered lifeworld of “interacting symbols… [with] patterns of interworking meanings… [that] transform sentiment into significance and so make it socially available” (Geertz, 1964, pp. 56–57).  For Geertz (1973), rhetoric provides connections between the different dimensions of culture, which he defines as “a system of inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate, perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and attitudes toward life” (p. 89).  Culture integrates three psychological dimensions: a cognitive dimension, consisting of a thought-world of collective representations networked together in a way that makes communication possible; a moral dimension, consisting of our convictions about what is just and unjust, right and wrong, important and trivial, which guide value judgments, goals, choices, evaluations, and norms of action; and an affective dimension, consisting of sentiments like love, fear, anger, loyalty, hate, gratitude, and disgust, which define and orient our emotional responses to people, events, and actions.  
	Their refusal to learn anything about rhetoric has, in Geertz's (1964) scathing judgment,
reduced sociologists to viewing ideologies as elaborate cries of pain. With no notion of how metaphor, analogy, irony, ambiguity, pun, paradox, hyperbole, rhythm, and all the other elements of what we lamely call “style” operate—even, in a majority of cases, with no recognition that these devices are of any importance in casting personal attitudes into public form, sociologists lack the symbolic resources out of which to construct a more incisive formulation. (p. 57)
These tropes are the points at which the different dimensions of culture intersect.  These different dimensions permit meanings to flow both continuously and discontinuously at once.  Concepts, symbols, and rhetorical forms can, like “nomads,” go into temporary exile from one field, or even from the cognitive lifeworld altogether, biding their time in the affective or moral realms (Noyes, 2004, p. 159).  The “rhizomatic multiplicities” of systems, fields, structures, and environments reflect the polytechtonic nature of the late modern world (Deleuze & Guattari, 1987, p. 370).
	In Chapter 3, I examine the roots of modern medicine in the humoral theories of Hippocrates and Galen.  Although the modern science of medicine has moved far beyond these theories, I will show that traces of their former existence are visible in the appeals used in both mainstream and alternative medicine.  Pieces of an ancient rhetorical system still exist, within which certain symbols, and certain kinds of grounds, contain the ability to persuade audiences of certain kinds of claims.  The transformation of medical theory, particularly over the last two hundred years, provides an opportunity to look at how a rhetorical system reproduces, and what happens to those processes after that rhetorical system seems to have been replaced.
	As I will show in the next two chapters, contemporary psychiatric diagnostic entities have a temporal element.  This is true across different nosological schemes: Psychodynamic perspectives locate present distress in past trauma, and neuropsychiatric definitions of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder depend, in different ways, on a sequence of syndromal features presenting over time.  More generally, patients and even populations of patients change over time.  Even more generally, science is a technique for producing knowledge that is necessarily temporal, as new findings and inventions update and supplement old knowledge.  The rhetorical economy of psychiatric science involves “temporalized complexity,” and thus depends on “constant disintegration” (Luhmann, 1995, p. 48).  Under this condition, “reproduction is a continuous problem,” because:
All elements pass away.  They cannot endure as elements in time, and thus they must constantly be produced on the basis of whatever constellation of elements is actual at any given moment.  Reproduction thus does not mean simply repeatedly producing the same, but rather reflexive production, production out of products. (p. 49)
Dynamic stability in rhetorical systems therefore will involve a change in elements over time, and the systems that successfully reproduce are those in which rhetors can re-purpose terms and strategies operative in one case to another, either in the same form or in a hybridized combination with other elements (symbols, warrants, evidence, topoi, etc.) of the system.  Often this entails retaining the form but not the content of past persuasive appeals.
	The principal means of rhetorical production are identification and division (Burke, 1969b, 1984b).  A rhetorical economy facilitates scientific thought by creating continuity and discontinuity at the right points, connecting or distinguishing old ideas and new, integrating or disentangling separate findings, embedding or disembedding different fields and subfields of knowledge.  As a consequence, ruptures and revolutions occur in the history of scientific theories, but the tropes and topoi of the past can remain even after a radical rupture occurs, for “in tearing down an old house, one usually saves the wreckage for use in building a new one” (Rene? Descartes, 1998, pp. 16–17).  
	That a cultural structure born in antiquity is alive in contemporary arguments (be they personal, technical, or public) implies the existence of mechanisms of rhetorical reproduction, since “in order to exist, every social formation must reproduce the conditions of its production at the same time as it produces” (Althusser, 1994, p. 101).  Understanding these mechanisms allows us to see nosological debates in a different light. This inquiry also reveals certain periodic rhetorical trends in the history of medicine—for example, the prominence of appeals to individual case reports rather than to appeals to theory, or the relative stress placed on continuity or discontinuity within a terministic model—and their significance in contemporary discourse.  More generally, this sort of study offers insights into the ways in which an old symbol’s “surplus of meaning” can serve as an effective (and affective) inventional resource, particularly for a discursive formation that is traveling the path from emergence to formalization, to reformalization (Foucault, 1972; Ricoeur, 1976, p. 45).  
CHAPTER THREE: RHETORICAL HISTORIES OF PSYCHOSIS
“You see, here’s the problem.  You don’t know the history of psychiatry.  I do.” – Tom Cruise.34

“Science, unlike art, is a system of derivative ideas filtered through centuries.  Consequently, originality in science is not only infrequent but unwelcome, and even the most original ideas have a history, often a much longer one than their authors suppose.” – Miriam Siegler & Humphry Osmond35

“Direct self-observation is not nearly sufficient for us to know ourselves: we require history, for the past continues to flow within us in a hundred waves; we ourselves are, indeed, nothing but that which at every moment we experience of this continual flowing…  [To] understand history we have to go in quest of the living remnants of historical epochs – we have to travel, as the father of history, Herodotus, traveled, to other nations – for these are only earlier stages of culture grown firm upon which we can take a stand…  But there exists a subtler art and object of travel which does not always require us to move from place to place or to traverse thousands of miles.  The last three centuries very probably still continue to live on, in all their cultural colors and cultural refractions, close beside us: they only want to be discovered.  In many families, indeed in individual men, the strata still lie neatly and clearly one on top of the other: elsewhere there are dislocations and faults which make understanding more difficult…  He who, after long practice in this art of travel, has become a hundred-eyed Argos, will in the end be attended everywhere by his Io36 – I mean his ego – and will rediscover the adventurous travels of this ego in process of becoming and transformation.” – Friedrich Nietzsche.37

“Let the credulous and the vulgar continue to believe that all mental woes can be cured by a daily application of old Greek myths to their private parts.” – Vladimir Nabokov.38

***
      The public discussion and controversy over DSM-5 takes place in the context of the progressive development of modern medicine generally and the emergence of modern psychiatry in particular.  This chapter draws forward this context by examining a number of key moves in the histories of medicine and madness.  The arc of the chapter is to situate the contemporary context concerning psychosis risk syndrome (a topic I take up directly in Chapter 4).  The controversy over predictive and diagnostic understandings of risk syndrome raises a critical issue central to the DSM-5 debate: What is the nature of mental illness and its status as a “real, recognizable, unitary and stable object of history”?  This question raises issues that concern the ordering of prevention and treatment within a hierarchy of medical values, the role of likely course and prognosis in psychiatric nosology, and the importance of (and attributed confidence in) scientific knowledge about the etiology and pathogenesis of psychotic disorders.  Analysis of the issue will offer insight into the ways in which continuity and discontinuity are performed rhetorically, the relationship between diagnosis and recommended treatment, and the perseverance of cultural systems and epistemic assemblages well beyond their putative abandonment by apparent consensus (Luque, Berrios, & Villagrán, 2003, p. 111).  I explore several interrelated historical discursive movements that are germane to each of these issues, yet can be difficult to see in contemporary biomedical discourses without the right tools.  
      The chapter is a study in rhetorical history.  It moves from what are regarded as dated theories of pathology to explain contemporary state-of-the-art medical appeals.  This critical history shows the contemporary relevance of the residues of thinking which still retain the capacity in some manner to “organize the chaos” within and around us (Nietzsche, 1874, p. 122).  Through the various twists and turns of material history, alongside adjacent professional and clinical languages, a perspective on the self-generating processes of discursive formations becomes visible.  By the end of the chapter, the diverse observations made along the path through the dislocations, faults, and neatly lying strata of the discourses of madness and medicine should coalesce into themes that set forth the context in which nosological positions become advocated and contested.  My history has three discursive episodes, each of which I shall preview briefly in order to show the progressive, cumulative developments of contexts within which DSM-5 debates occur.
      1. The Humoral Model of Pathology.  Humorism (sometimes 'humoralism' or the 'humoral model') constitutes a model that dominated the articulation of medicine for more than 2,500 years.  This discourse offers the earliest definitions of pathology in the Western medical tradition.  Humorism was for all purposes coequal with medicine as a field of knowledge, into which all medical discoveries for millennia were integrated.  This chapter identifies basic premises of this model and reads select, foundational texts of medical science in the Hippocratic corpus and the writings of Galen.  Additionally, it examines non-medical authorities writing about medicine, especially the Roman Epicurean philosopher Lucretius.  His radically material and biological account of mental illness shares much in common with contemporary biomedical views.  From the very beginning, Hippocrates made both epistemic and institutional moves as he formulated medical practice.  Modern medicine featured similar rhetorical strategies in defining medicine and madness.  These feature a wide array of relevant discourses, including: Mesmerism (a proto-psychotherapy developed to treat what are now known as dissociative identity disorders); categories adopted by alienists like melancholia and mania; twentieth century theories about personality structures and types; contemporary constructs like Attention Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD); recurrent institutional squabbles between psychiatrists and psychologists; the marketing of alternative 'holistic' or 'naturopathic' dietary supplements; and the presentation and rhetorical use of scans produced with brain imaging technologies.  The chapter shows how traditional concepts were carried forward into modern times.
      2. The Rise of Scientific Medicine.  For the purposes of this study, I examine the transition to a 'scientific' approach to medicine as a phenomenon stretching from the seventeenth century, when the therapeutic effects of the bark of cinchona trees (which contains quinine, an effective malaria treatment) were discovered, to the early twentieth century.  The achievements most relevant to the DSM-5 debate come from the emergence (and subsequent convergence) of ontological and physiological interpretations of pathology.  Thomas Sydenham, called the 'English Hippocrates,' offers an example of departure to the modern.  His approach to medicine was at once neo-Hippocratic and proto-biopolitical, retaining certain humoral beliefs.  These beliefs informed his decisions about the variables he included in the first ever epidemiological study involving data collection and statistical analysis.  Sydenham crafted an ontological distinction, dividing illness into discrete disease entities that each present as a syndrome with characteristic clinical signs and symptoms.  His empiricist approach (distinguished from rationalist humorism) was concerned with “semeiosis” rather than diagnosis (Coulter, 1975, p. 247).39  Sydenham's classification of 'hysteria' as a mental illness anticipated the contemporary conflict between psychological and biological explanations in psychiatry.  A later generation of physicians revised this view, arguing that disordered bodily 'vapors' were the source of hysteria.  In turn, twentieth century psychoanalysis reformulated these class, gender, and sex based outlooks into 'conversion disorder,' an illness that features psychic tensions giving way to somatic distress.  Rudolf Virchow argued that biological terminology and conceptualization should replace the ontological understanding of illness.  The relationship between psychoanalysis and pharmaceutical intervention thus became contested.  Although its terms were worked out early in the twentieth century, the modern setting for defining and diagnosing disorder still broadly shapes the context for DSM-5 contestation.
      3. The Emergent Assembly of Psychiatry.  The final section of this rhetorical history describes the genesis of psychiatry.  Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol, a French alienist, produced the first comprehensive nosology of mental illness based on the patients he observed while working in an asylum.  Visual representations played a critical role in Esquirol's efforts to persuade his colleagues of the merits of his classification scheme.  Esquirol appropriated the visual rhetoric of Linnaeus, the father of modern taxonomy.  Esquirol's representations are followed by the semiotic dialectic of 'neurosis' and 'psychosis,' which unfolded alongside Emil Kraepelin's diagnostic category 'dementia praecox.'  Dementia praecox was a revolutionary pathological entity because it was defined by its temporal course and prognosis.  This concept of psychotic illness evolved into Bleuler's 'schizophrenia,' which re-imagined dementia praecox as a loosening of associations and a splitting of the mind.  The sharp material turn of the last fifty years gave biological meaning to these two ideas: a loss of associations between neurons and neurological lesions in gray and white matter.  Developments in psychopharmacology and in brain imaging techniques continue the material turn, which pharmaceutical advertising has carried to publics.  The mixed development of psychiatry combined with public representations of disease form the context in which DSM-5 finds controversy attributed to the well-being of a profession and its publics.
The Humoral Model of Pathology
      Humorism is a model of pathology that explains variance in human health, personality, and drive as a function of the deficiencies and excesses of four distinct bodily fluids, the humors.  Hippocrates compiled humorism into a system in the fourth century before the Common Era, and some five centuries later, Claudius Galen integrated it with Aristotelian philosophy into a comprehensive theory for the science of medicine, defined as “the knowledge of what is healthy, what is morbid, and what is neither” (Galen, 2004, p. 1).40  Mapped onto the four classic elements that Empedocles (2012) had described a century before Hippocrates, the humors were structurally organized in relation to one another according to the qualitative binaries of hot/cold and wet/dry (Figure 3.1).  
Source: (Magner, 2002, p. 25)
      While it might seem paradoxical to describe a liquid as ‘dry,’ these qualities were simultaneously metaphorical and physiological.  Hippocrates observed, for example, that one could become dehydrated as a result of drinking too much wine.41  Further, he observed that the consumption of wine often brought a feeling of warmth.  Hence, Hippocrates thought of wine as being both hot and dry.  Noting that the sweetness of a wine inversely correlates with its suppressive effect on salivation, acrid wines were described as more ‘dry’ than sweet wines, a distinction that persists today (Norrie, 2003).  In a similar manner, we make use of humoral terminology when we speak of comedy as ‘dry’ (as a deadpan delivery lacks the outward signs of cheer associated with ‘moist’ sanguine humor) or ‘dark’ (associated with the melancholy of black bile).
      Physicians understood the humors to be “life-giving moisture,” liquid incarnations of the vital forces that govern all of the rhythms of life, from the seasons and the weather all the way down to human health, “a proper mixture of the humors being as necessary to bodily growth and functioning as that of the elements to the creation of permanent substances” (Tillyard, 2011, p. 69).  These vital forces deeply penetrate our corporeal nature, circulating through and ‘coloring’ human bodies, both literally and (as we understand it today) metaphorically, as in the reddening of the face associated with both a sanguine complexion and a sanguine disposition.  In other words, they are visibly present in one’s complexion (the literal result of a ‘complex’ of humors), level of activity, mood, posture, speech, and temperature (derived etymologically from the Latin temperare, ‘to mix’).  Each humor further corresponds with a distinctive temperament (also derived from temperare) and prevailing affective state: black bile (the hidden fluid responsible for darkening blood and stool, thought to be produced in the spleen or bowel) with the sad melancholic; choler (yellow bile or gastric juice, thought to be produced in the liver) with the angry choleric; phlegm (mucus, sweat, tears, and other colorless secretions, thought to be produced in the brain) with the sluggish phlegmatic; and blood (a hot red liquid thought to be produced in the heart) with the cheerful sanguine (Galen, 2004; Gottfried, 1983; Healy, 2008; Magner, 2002; Noll, 2011).  
      Though not terribly controversial at the time, the notion that our personality and behavior are at least partially (if not entirely) determined by physiological factors was repressed deep within the Western cultural unconsciousness for millennia, and its return in the nineteenth century ironically was instrumental in the final rejection of humorism by the medical establishment in favor of a model of discrete disease states based on pathological anatomy.  The four temperaments, proto-Weberian ideal types of characterological dispositions, signify clusters of character tendencies (later conceptualized as personality traits), the consequences of the humors tempering one another such that one of the four humors completely dominates the other three in an individual's body and, thus, character (Strelau, 2002; Weber, 1949).  
      In a physically and mentally healthy person, all four humors are in a state of eucrasia (literally a ‘good mixture’) or balance.  Accordingly, dyscrasia (‘bad mixture’), the acute (sometimes chronic) imbalance of humors, is the direct cause of most disease.  ‘Cause’ here refers to susceptibility, a disposition or tendency (‘habitus’) toward some specific manifestation of disease; “habitus phthisicus,” for example, is the Latinized Hippocratic term used to describe someone who is especially susceptible to what was later known as pulmonary tuberculosis (R. J. Campbell, 2009, p. 440).  Hippocrates notes:
If the brain is corrupted by phlegm the patients are quiet and silent, if by bile they are vociferous, malignant and act improperly.  If the brain is heated, terrors, fears, and terrifying dreams occur; if it is too cool the patients are grieved and troubled. (cited by Diethelm, 1971, p. 16)   
Another form of imbalance, either in some singular extra-humoral disposition or in a crisis associated with an inner conflict between dispositions, produces an illness state known as ‘distemper,’ paralleling our contemporary notion(s) of the disordered personality (e.g., borderline personality disorder), distinguished from the acute clinical syndrome (Healy, 2008).42  
      In some cases, the pathogenic imbalance is not within an individual human body (agent), but rather the surrounding environment (scene), which may be a source of some bad odor (‘miasma’) or of contagion, a disease substance that, unlike miasma, was produced within a human body before beginning to circulate through corrupted or polluted air (Gottfried, 1983; Noll, 2011).  When predisposition to a particular illness runs in a family, the imbalance is not a humoral excess or deficiency per se, but rather an intrinsic imbalance within a single humor—‘bad blood,’ in which the inherited trait, or perhaps rather heredity as such, is metonymically reduced to the sanguine humor (Ciobanu, 2012).  Infectious disease was communicable even across the barrier of metaphor, as an imbalance in the ‘body politic’ was known to render individual human bodies susceptible to leprosy (Douglas, 1992).  
	Humoral pathology served as a logic that unified the various medical techniques of diagnosis and intervention.  The model provided explanations of the mechanisms of ancient pharmacotherapy.  These explanations spread to other domains of thought through figures of speech.  For example, the sophist Gorgias of Leontini invoked humoral pathology in his famous observation about the power of rhetoric:
The effect of speech upon the soul is comparable to the power of drugs over the nature of bodies.  For just as different drugs dispel different secretions from the body, and some bring an end to disease and others to life, so also in the case of speeches: some distress, others delight, some cause fear, others make the hearers bold, and some drug and bewitch the soul with a kind of evil persuasion. (Gorgias, 1972, para. 14).
This may be the first articulation of the 'talking cure,' written 2,300 years before Freud was born, formulated as an argument by analogy to humoral medicine.
      We can see traces of the humoral architectonic in our everyday language today, as when a chronically irritable person, prone to outbursts of anger, is said to have a ‘bad temper’ (and is perhaps ‘hot-headed,’ unlike people who can ‘keep their cool’ when the unexpected occurs) or when a moody, sensitive, and perhaps erratic individual is said to be ‘temperamental.’  An almost opposite type of character is signified by ‘temperance,’ which invokes notions of moderation and self-control, the result of a balanced character.  Etymologically, the difference between ‘temperament’ and ‘temperance,’ both noun derivatives of the verb temperare, is that the former contains the Latin suffix –mentum while the latter contains the Latin suffix –antia. The suffixes –mentum and –antia are extremely similar, both functioning to convert a verb into a noun representing a state associated with, produced by, or instantiated in the action signified by the verb.  The difference is that –mentum converts the verb into a concrete state, generally the subject (as in government) or object (as in firmament) of the verb, while –antia converts the present participle form of the verb into a noun, emphasizing process rather than source or outcome (Luschnig & Luschnig, 1982).  Temperamental is simply an adjective derived from temperament.  Hence, ‘temperamental’ describes someone prone to concrete states of character or affect, the outcomes of distinctive humoral mixtures that are imbalanced in one way or another.  In contrast, temperate (the adjectival form of temperance) describes someone whose character is moderated by a steady, balanced process of humoral mixing (as well as a steady, balanced climate).  This is how two nearly identical words generated within a robust semiotic system came to have nearly opposite meanings.43  
      The difference between concrete states and dynamic processes may seem merely semantic, but will come to be the pivot point for multiple revolutions in psychiatric nosology as the conflict between categorical and dimensional approaches to diagnosis.  Indeed, Theodore Millon, a psychologist who served on both the DSM-III and DSM-IV committees, and Erik Simonsen, past president of the International Society on the Study of Personality Disorders and past chairman of the World Psychiatric Association section on personality disorders, argue that, while
debates on these issues often degenerate into semantic arguments and theoretical hairsplitting, it is naïve to assume that metaphysical verbiage and word quibbling are all that are involved.  Nevertheless, the language that we use, and the assumptions such language reflects, are very much a part of our scientific disagreements.  (Millon & Simonsen, 2010, p. 50)
How one defines pathology determines how one thinks of individual disorders: how to measure their presence or absence, what it means to treat them, and how to distinguish one from another.
Humoral Rhetoric from Antiquity to Modernity
      In contrast with certain mystical or religious orientations in which madness (possession by a demonic or divine force) and physical ailments (manifestations of the corrupting or defiling nature of sin) are seen in moral terms as two incommensurate elements of a cosmic theological drama, the humoral orientation seems strikingly modern.  Its concepts of mental and physical illness both are ‘seen’ (literally and metaphorically) as natural processes best explained physiologically and, thus, falling within the domain of medical science.  This is very clear in Hippocrates’s treatment of the so-called ‘sacred disease,’ today known as epilepsy, in which he presents a thoroughly secular understanding of mental illness (as epilepsy was regarded from antiquity until very recently) along with some very prescient claims about the role and functions of the brain:
I do not believe that the ‘Sacred Disease’ is any more divine or sacred than any other disease but, on the contrary, has specific characteristics and a definite cause.  Nevertheless, because it is completely different from other diseases, it has been regarded as a divine visitation by those who, being only human, view it with ignorance and astonishment… It is my opinion that those who first called this disease ‘sacred’ were the sort of people we now call witch-doctors, faith-healers, quacks and charlatans.  These are exactly the people who pretend to be very pious and to be particularly wise.  By invoking a divine element they were able to screen their own failure to give suitable treatment and so called this a ‘sacred’ malady to conceal their ignorance of its nature…  The brain is the seat of this disease, as it is of other very violent diseases…  It ought to be generally known that the source of our pleasure, merriment, laughter and amusement, as of our grief, pain, anxiety and tears, is none other than the brain.  It is specially the organ which enables us to think, see and hear, and to distinguish the ugly and the beautiful…  It is the brain too which is the seat of madness and delirium, of the fears and frights which assail us, often by night, but sometimes even by day; it is there where lies the cause of insomnia and sleep-walking, of thoughts that will not come, forgotten duties and eccentricities.  All such things result from an unhealthy condition of the brain…  This so-called ‘sacred disease’ is due to the same causes as all other diseases…  Each has its own nature44 and character and there is nothing in any disease which is unintelligible or which is insusceptible to treatment…  The physician… could cure this disease too provided that he could distinguish the right moment for the application of the remedies.  He would not need to resort to “purifications” and magic spells.  (Hippocrates, 1995, pp. 139–144)
This line of argument was centuries ahead of its time, and not only on account of the “astonishingly prescient” insights about the material nature of conscious experience located in the brain, for which it justifiably is celebrated (Zeman, 2006, p. 2).45  This jurisdictional polemic is also evidence that, from the very beginning, Western medicine has been the site of a discursive struggle over the politics of medical expertise.  
      While admitting that the ‘sacred disease’ certainly may seem supernatural to a non-expert, Hippocrates positions himself as an expert who knows better, because he understands that, like other physiological diseases, the ‘sacred disease’ is caused by organic dysfunction.  Further, causal knowledge should be privileged over other kinds of knowledge because one cannot effectively treat disease without it.  By this justification, Hippocrates defines the ‘sacred disease’ as a physiological phenomenon.46  The tactic of arguing from definition “is a very persuasive way to stake out expertise, since it distinguishes what is within the purview of a particular expert from what is not” (Hartelius, 2011, p. 113).  By embedding a causal argument within an argument from definition, Hippocrates further strengthens his position by demonstrating that there is a rational basis for privileging the physiological expertise of a physician over the theological expertise of a faith-healer.
	This novel interpretation of reality became part of medicine's origin myth, giving rise to a rhetorical form that physicians have employed at various points in history.  In the eighteenth century, the many individuals who displayed multiple personalities “were understood, within the explanatory paradigms of their era, to be afflicted with the various Judeo-Christian forms of possession, and were approached therapeutically with the culturally-sanctioned Judeo-Christian rituals of exorcism” (Kluft, 1993, p. 87).  Franz Mesmer challenged this in 1775 by offering the 'scientific' explanation that the phenomenon and its apparent treatment by exorcism were in fact both the result of 'animal magnetism.'  Mesmer advocated a new technique “to cure patients for very high fees by assembling them around a container filled with magnetized water” (Ellenberger, 1970, p. 186).  Mesmer's theory, connecting physiology and cosmology, was based on a
universal principle of fluid matter, which occupies all space; and that as all bodies moving in the world, abound with pores, this fluid matter introduces itself through the interstices and returns backwards and forwards, flowing through one body by the currents which issue therefrom to another, as in a magnet, which produces the phenomenon we call Animal Magnetism.  This fluid consists of fire, air, and spirit, and like all other fluids tends to an equilibrium...  Philosophers have compared the human body to an electrical machine, they have supposed the arms the conductors, the fingers the pointers, which any one may experience by trying.  Hold the fingers of both hands for some time towards the patient's pericardium, and you may easily perceive all the effects of electricity on the invalid's body.  (Wonders of animal magnetism displayed, 1791, pp. 11–13)
The various magnetic treatments worked best on “thin bilious persons of a sanguine constitution whose nervous system is irritable” (de Veaumore, 1785, p. vi).
	By reinterpreting supernatural possession according to humoral theory (in a modified form: illness was the result of an imbalance of a magnetic fluid that circulated through the body), Mesmer echoed Hippocrates' reinterpretation of the 'sacred disease.'  Mesmer slightly modernized the idea by appealing to a recent technological invention, the Leyden jar, a type of capacitor that had been invented thirty years earlier (Riskin, 2002).  With the simple addition of magnets, a humoral system could simultaneously possess the glow of the state-of-the-art and the mystique of a received esoteric tradition: The anonymous author of the 1791 treatise I quoted above reports that he, speaking of himself in the third person, “is one of the few instances of exception from the general mysterious oath of secrecy; yet he has the happiness of being fully instructed in this wonderful system, by a professor of the first rate abilities” (p. 15).  
	Even though his theory was quickly rejected as physically and physiologically absurd, Mesmer's appropriation of the Hippocratic drama in which modern science triumphs over myth and superstition made it persuasive, and its persuasiveness persisted after its formal rejection.  Followers of Mesmer explained that the efficacy of his treatment was the result of suggestion, giving birth to hypnosis, in which one is 'mesmerized' (C. L. Hull, 1929).  In this case, a psychological interpretation replaced an earlier physical, biological etiology for mental illness.  Understood as a mysterious form of persuasion, animal magnetism provided a language in which the dynamics of political revolution could be expressed: Porter (1985) notes that “the French Revolution begot 'political Mesmerists,' who hoped the waves of animal magnetism would radiate a politics of peace, liberty, and health” (p. 23).  
	The association of magnetism and health continues today in the form of magnetic therapy.  An alternative medicine website (through which various magnetic products are available for purchase) suggests that magnetic therapy
is recognized as a non-evasive [sic] natural therapy...  [Magnets] are used in hospitals and clinics...  Magnetism is the very foundation of life on earth.  The human body has developed over millions of years within this magnetic field.  Our body is “electric,” it resonates within a frequency range and is constantly being altered by poor diet, injury, illness, accidents and the effects of electro-magnetic fields.  Magnet therapy products can help to readdress [sic] this imbalance by allowing the body to repair itself, from within. (MAGNETiC, 2007, para. 2–4)
The website (which is a typical example of this kind of discourse) attempts to build ethos by referencing the use of magnetism in orthodox medicine, specifically, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).  We will see this phenomenon again in the next section, which examines the role of humoral rhetoric in 'naturopathic' marketing appeals.  
      A more contemporary reappearance of an Hippocratic rhetorical form, similarly employing an argument from definition that implicitly is backed by a claim to superior knowledge about cause and effect, appears in the APA’s official response to legislation proposing to extend prescribing rights to clinical psychologists:
The American Psychiatric Association deplores [proposed legislation that would] permit clinical psychologists to prescribe potent medication… Psychologists have always had a clear path to prescribing privileges: medical school.  No psychology-designed and administered crash course in drug prescribing can substitute for the comprehensive knowledge and skills physicians achieve through medical education and rigorous clinical experience…  We pledge to continue to oppose all efforts to jeopardize the public health by allowing persons without a medical education to practice medicine.  (Harding, 2002, para. 1–4, my emphasis)
Then, as now, disciplinary boundary disputes were contests between competing theories about the causes and remedies of disease.  If madness is caused by the gods, then its treatment should be the domain of priests; if instead madness is caused by humoral disturbances, then physicians and their remedies should enjoy privileged status.  
      In accordance with Hippocrates' physiological model, from antiquity through the beginning of the nineteenth century, physicians believed that madness (whether presenting with seizures, delirium, sleep-walking, or any other ‘very violent’ disease of the brain) was a unitary phenomenon characterized by a total insanity that interfered with every function of the mind (generally understood to be unitary in substance), a “delirious and raving state” that robbed one of all awareness, judgment, and free will (Healy, 1997, p. 29).  Madness could manifest as mania, characterized by frenzied overactivity, or melancholia, characterized by lugubrious underactivity, but in either case the insane person was completely dissociated from reality, whether catatonic or maniacal.  This entails many conditions that would not fall today under the domain of psychiatry, e.g., amnesia, cerebellar ataxia, delirium, dementia, encephalitis, epilepsy, narcolepsy, peduncular hallucinosis, stroke, stupor, tertiary syphilis, etc. (Fear, Sharp, & Healy, 1995).  
      Hippocrates and Galen both left written ‘case’ descriptions of mental illnesses, a genre of medical rhetoric which has only recently receded in prominence in the discourses of institutional psychiatry in favor of the randomized controlled clinical trial, in which an anonymous sample of patients stands in for a population (Berkenkotter, 2011).  These case descriptions superficially resemble modern constructs of mental illnesses, which enables the modern practice in which disease constructs as we understand them today are placed into narratives that project them into the past, so that their modern development appears natural and inevitable (Healy, 2008).  Against the background of ancient and obscure medical theories, anything resembling something we can make sense of stands out and is particularly susceptible to anachronistic misreading.  
      This tendency may be less pronounced with texts not principally concerned with the techne of medicine.  Titus Lucretius Carus, a Roman philosopher writing some three centuries after Hippocrates (and about two centuries before Galen), crafted an argument symptomatic of the orientation toward mental health and the mind engendered by ancient humoral thinking. In a polemic against the notion of an afterlife, Lucretius describes an acute state of frenzy (with features of delirium, psychosis, and the ‘sacred disease’) grounded in an explicitly material understanding of cognition and the mind as a natural, non-unitary biological object so deeply interconnected with the rest of the body as to give rise to something resembling a somatoform disorder:
When… the mind is upset by some more overwhelming fear, we see all the spirit in every limb upset in sympathy.  Sweat and pallor break out all over the body.  Speech grows inarticulate; the voice fails; the eyes grow dim; the ears buzz; the limbs totter.  Often we see men actually drop down because of the terror that has gripped their minds…  The same reasoning proves that mind and spirit are both composed of matter.  We see them propelling the limbs, rousing the body from sleep, changing the expression of the face and guiding and steering the whole man – activities that all clearly involve touch, as touch in turn involves matter.  How then can we deny their material nature?  …[As] the body suffers the horrors of disease and the pangs of pain, so we see the mind stabbed with anguish, grief, and fear…  Often enough in the body’s illness the mind wanders.  It raves and babbles distractedly.  At times it drifts on a tide of drowsiness, with drooping eyelids and nodding head, into a deep and unbroken sleep…  Since the mind is thus invaded by the contagion of disease, you must acknowledge that it is destructible…  Or it may happen that a man is seized with a sudden spasm of epilepsy before our eyes.  He falls as though struck by lightning and foams at the mouth.  He groans and trembles in every joint.  He raves.  He contracts his muscles.  He writhes.  He gasps convulsively…  The cause of the foaming is that the spirit, torn apart by the violence of the disease throughout the limbs, riots and whips up spray…  The raving occurs because mind and spirit are dislodged and, as I have explained, split up and scattered this way and that by the same poison [that is, the excess of the offending humor].  Then, when the cause of the disease has passed its climax and the morbid secretion of the distempered body has returned to its secret abode, then the man rises, swaying unsteadily at first, and returns bit by bit to all his senses and recovers his vital spirit…  Conversely, we see that the mind, like a sick body, can be healed and directed by medicine…  When you embark on an attempt to alter the mind or to direct any other natural object, it is fair to suppose that you are adding certain parts or transposing them or subtracting some trifle at any rate from their sum.  But an immortal object will not let its parts be rearranged or added to, or the least bit drop off…  [Spirit] and mind are held in by the whole body, intermingled through veins and flesh, sinews and bones, and are… kept together so as to perform the motions that generate sentience.  (Lucretius, 1994, pp. 70–81)
Early modern anxieties about the distinction between body and mind, the unitary and/or immortal nature of the latter, and the existence of powerful affective passions within a morally responsible and rationally sovereign subject all seem absent in the humoral lifeworld as exemplified in this text.  
      Despite the Epicurean metaphysical orientation that sees reality as fundamentally composed of indivisible, discrete atomic units, this discourse consistently stresses continuity—between illness and health, mind and body, mental and physical disease—along with a radical materialism according to which all mental and physical pathologies share a proximate biological pathogenesis.  This tension appears in the basic structure of the argument against the immortality of the soul.  Though Lucretius and Hippocrates have very different objectives, both of their arguments depend on establishing an identity between mental and physical illness.  For Lucretius, this equation provides evidence that the soul or psyche is entirely material, and, because the material body evidently is destructible, the soul, therefore, is destructible.  The passage begins with an argument by sign, noting the physiological changes that accompany intense fear or anxiety.  Lucretius points to three binary clusters of signs: skin disturbances with speech disturbances, dimming eyes with failing voice, and buzzing ears with tottering limbs.  Each pair contains a spiritual component and a somatic component.  The first cluster is external, visibly evident; the second cluster is relational, a disturbance in the sick patient’s ability to perceive the outer world and in the outer world's ability to observe the spirit within; the third is internal, auditory hallucinations and non-responsive muscles.  The body responds this way to mental anxiety because the spirit (energy animating body and mind) is upset in ‘sympathy’ with the mind.  Galen further developed this basic idea when he discovered and named the sympathetic nervous system, which he believed was the medium for vital energy that has become decoupled from the humors.  The connection goes both ways: Just as mental anguish can manifest in somatic form, so too can physical illness produce mental symptoms.  
      The same clustering pattern recurs again in the description of the man seized with epilepsy.  Just before this section, Lucretius associates vocal utterances with mental activity by positioning the mind as the speaking subject who ‘raves’ and ‘babbles’ during somatic illness.  Lucretius then presents the symptoms of the ‘sacred disease’ in four clusters of voice (a movement of the mind) with body motion.  The man falls and his mouth foams; groans while his joints tremble; raves as his muscles contract; and finally, writhes and gasps.  When the seizure ends, physical swaying mirrors the recovery of senses.  Physical motion, Lucretius explains, generates sentience.  The explanation of the common causes of mental and somatic suffering amplifies their verbal association.  The man’s spirit, as physical as mind and body, has been lacerated by the ‘violence’ in the limbs caused by the poisonous humoral excess, which also splits his psyche (a complex of mind and spirit).  As we shall see, this metaphor—intended literally—is a conceptual prodrome of the modern disease entity schizophrenia, a loosening of associations in the psyche accompanied by neurobiological deficits that imply a splitting of the mind.  
      Though Lucretius describes the human body in terms of its discrete parts, made all the more discontinuous as they fissure and separate over the course of the seizure, the force of the argument comes from the contrast between this disjunction, on one hand, and the greater underlying unity in substance and action, on the other.  This is expressed in a different way in the argument from definition at the end of the passage.  Immortality may be predicated only of a composite substance that absolutely resists change, i.e., addition, subtraction, or rearrangement of its component parts.  Because the mind can be healed by medicine, it cannot have this property.  In this form, the argument seems redundant, because the fact that the mind can become sick in the first place also proves it is subject to change.  But its minor premise, the similitude between sick body and sick mind, expresses explicitly what was implied in the copia of mental and somatic symptom clusters.
      Understood as a terministic screen, the humoral model overpowers the atomistic tendency of Epicureanism to direct attention away from the continuous.  Kenneth Burke explains that “there are two kinds of terms: terms that put things together and terms that take things apart”; accordingly, “some systems stress the principle of continuity, some the principle of discontinuity…  All terminologies must implicitly or explicitly embody choices between the principle of continuity and the principle of discontinuity” (1966, pp. 49–50).  This is what distinguishes a categorical nosology, which emphasizes differences in kind, from a dimensional nosology, which emphasizes differences in degree.  In Lucretius' image of whole-body madness, we can see not only that the humoral terminology stresses continuity, but that it does so forcefully, perhaps overwhelmingly, relative to another terminology.  The representations of health and disease manifest this same ratio of continuity to discontinuity that characterizes the rhetorical assemblage by which they are produced.  
      Like body and soul, rhetorical models of health and sickness are mortal.  Their direction or alteration occurs by adding to, subtracting from, or transposing their component parts.  But in the process of change, the parts are conserved.  What is added comes from somewhere, and what is subtracted goes somewhere, and in this sense they achieve a restricted form of immortality.  For most of history, the process of change occurs through the informal formation of consensus among members of a rhetorical community.  The DSM, with its formal revision process, institutionalizes the consensus-approved rhetorical model and explicitly defines its component parts and their arrangement.  But however a model is changed, its parts live on as vestiges of the prior unity, carrying with them the model’s unique tropes and ability to persuade.
      Though humoral pathology has been thoroughly discredited and explicitly rejected by modern medical science, it maintains a powerful cultural presence to this day.  Humoral tropes, logics, and aesthetics continually show up in modern medical rhetoric.  ‘Holistic’ and ‘naturopathic’ medicine today is often marketed in the humoral idiom.  As we will see in subsequent chapters—especially in the next chapter's discussion of ‘disease branding’ and 'pre-illnesses'—the effective marketing of a new therapy or treatment modality often must include constructing a health problem that the new product can treat.  This is simply an application of the more general strategy in deliberative rhetoric to define or frame a problem in a way that implies the appropriateness of the advocated solution.47  To market vitamins, herbs, and other ‘nutritional supplements,’ one also must sell a corresponding model of pathology.  This rhetorical situation is constrained, however, by FDA rules that strictly regulate the marketing of therapeutic agents “intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease” (Code of Federal Regulations, 2012). The naturopathic marketer does not need to make such claims, however, if instead the product is intended to rectify some sort of imbalance which may, among other things, contribute to some disease.  This presents an interesting opportunity for interdisciplinary collaboration between lawyers and marketers as they seek to craft a narrative that includes everything but the illicit therapeutic claim (upon which the entire advertisement depends).  As the FDA does not regulate the use of enthymemes, presumably this is not illegal.48  
      An example of this tactic appears in the marketing copy of one nutritional supplement that relies extensively on the rhetorical resources of humorism, substituting dietary elements and ‘brain chemistry’ for bodily fluids.  The potential consumer/patient is informed that Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is in fact a group of disorders of “certain mechanisms in the central nervous system,” and that various food additives, which can “throw off the balance in the chemistry of the brain,” often are to blame (2013, para. 1–2).  The curious logical jump between these two sentences underscores the enthymematic status of the therapeutic claim:
Researchers have found that a lack of these nutrients to the brain can cause from minor to serious mental and emotional imbalances, which are common symptoms in Adult ADHD. Using a liquid form is preferable here for best absorption. (The Balance You Need, 2013, para. 4)  
The humoral architectonic provides an organizing rhetorical logic that brings together a disparate constellation of concerns: the preoccupation with deficiencies, excesses, and balance (particularly of the neurohumoral 'brain chemistry'); the references to vital life forces; the observation that the recommended course of action promotes 'health overall'; and the semiotic pairing, both semantically and iconically, of balance and fluid (Figure 3.2).  



Source: (The Balance You Need, 2013).
	While anti-modern tropes about the hazards of technology frequently appear in naturopathic discourses, it is clear that these discourses have a catholic nature.  Advertisers can incorporate humoralized techno-scientific medical appeals to build credibility.  For example, a subpage devoted to explaining the causes of ADHD contains an image with two side-by-side brain scans, most likely produced by positron emission tomography (PET) on subjects who have received injections of radiolabelled raclopride, used to measure dopamine receptor density (Köhler, Hall, Ögren, & Gawell, 1985; The Balance You Need, 2012).  None of this is explained—indeed, the image is not even mentioned in passing.  The image itself contains no internal caption or explanation aside from a key by which we can see that certain areas of the control subject’s brain are variously ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ in some unspecified respect than the matching areas of the ADHD subject’s brain (Figure 3.3).



Source: (The Balance You Need, 2012).
      The average member of the public, particularly one who might be shopping for a ‘natural’ ADHD medicine, probably cannot read PET scans, so the inclusion of details or some context might not have added anything meaningful to the message, but with their conspicuous absence the image clearly must be understood as an enthymeme.  This image functions as a prop that conveys the idea that ADHD is ‘real,’ which is to say a neurobiological disorder.  This was less of a problem when the disorder was known as 'minimal brain dysfunction' (MBD) or 'minimal brain damage,' a disease construct based on certain observed similarities between encephalitis survivors with brain lesions and the wider group of poorly behaved children (Lakoff, 2000).  Physicians diagnosed MBD so frequently that, by the middle of the 1970s, it had
become an all-encompassing, wastebasket diagnosis for any child who does not quite conform to society's stereotype of normal children...  Children are labeled as such by school psychologists who find “organicity” on psychological testing or even by teachers who find certain vague symptoms that they relate to MBD. Labeling troubled children as having MBD has almost become a national pastime.  (Schmitt, 1975, p. 1313)
Lacking reliable evidence that the disorder was in fact caused by “some underlying unobservable etiological mechanism in the brain,” and concerned about the stigmatizing effect of labelling children as brain damaged, the American Psychiatric Association renamed the disorder “attention deficit disorder (with or without hyperactivity)” in DSM-III and then “attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder” in DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987, p. 50; Barkley, 2006, p. 8).  
	If the disorder is non-organic, parents are less accepting of biological treatments.  This is the attitude that the appeal to brain imaging militates against.  Even though “some people think” that problems with attention and hyperactivity are caused by bad parenting or television, they are in fact symptoms of this neurobiological disorder (The Balance You Need, 2012, para. 5).  Additionally, the image reinforces the connection to modern medical science and its prestige, which makes the website less likely to be read as quackery.  We are also told that the information offered here, which culminates in a product testimonial for some redacted “liquid organic product” produced by the also redacted “Company X,” is simply for educational purposes.  Presumably the name of the product ‘Body Balance’ was not included so as to maintain the farcical suggestion that this subpage of the Body Balance website is for “information purposes only,” though this is undermined by the fact that the words “liquid organic product” contain a hyperlink to the main product page.  Crucially, nothing on the page is intended to help anyone treat the medical disorder ADHD, but rather “simply [to] offer some opinions as to how to possibly help with ADHD symptoms.”  Besides recommending the Body Balance product, these opinions also include the suggestion to perform a “colon cleanse” four times annually; conveniently, a colon cleansing supplement is also available for sale elsewhere on the website.49  
      The discrete disease entity ADHD seems particularly well-suited to a humoral reading, given that its defining features are characterized as a deficiency in ‘attention’ and a surplus of ‘activity.’  Lay explanations of the supposedly ‘paradoxical’ efficacy of its conventional medical treatment, psychostimulant therapy—i.e., amphetamine ('Adderall,' 'Dexadrine,' 'Vyvanse'), methamphetamine ('Desoxyn'), or methylphenidate ('Concerta,' 'Focalin,' 'Ritalin')—often resemble the Galenic notion of sympathy.50  This parallels the biomedical understanding that stimulants are ‘sympathomimetic,’ i.e., capable of arousing the sympathetic nervous system, increasing blood pressure, body temperature, and heart rate (Grohol, 2012).  Despite universal expert rejection of humoral theory’s scientific validity, its rhetorical validity depends upon whether potential consumers find such appeals persuasive.  In the world of late capitalism, Body Balance (in liquid commodity form) can be purchased over the internet.  Similarly, the ongoing suasive force of the therapeutic logic of ‘sympathy’ enables the homeopathy industry today to market biologically inert placebo remedies to the tune of more than three billion dollars in annual revenues in the United States alone (Nahin, Barnes, Stussman, & Bloom, 2009).51  Finally, explanations of the action of pharmacological agents in terms of ‘sympathy’ (and its inverse, ‘antipathy’) persisted well into the nineteenth century, and physiologists have retained Galen’s name ‘sympathetic nervous system’ to refer to the anatomical branch of the autonomic nervous system responsible for mediating the ‘sympatho-adrenal’ (‘fight-or-flight’) response (Ackerknecht, 1974).  
Why did Humorism Succeed?
	According to the standards of modern scientific positivism, humorism is nothing more than pseudoscience, no more legitimate than astrology or phrenology.  It particularly fails the falsifiability criterion, an essential reality-testing procedure according to which a scientific theory is valid to the extent that it can make successful predictions (Popper, 1935).  It is somewhat surprising that humorism held sway with the bulk of medical authorities from the time of Hippocrates through the first part of the nineteenth century.  How is it possible that so few noticed an imbalance between humorism's theoretical sophistication and its practical failures in developing effective cures for disease?  This was no innocuous form of quackery, merely promoting harmless absurdities or ineffective but cheap placebos: Many sick people were given dangerous diaphoretics, laxatives, purgatives, and diuretics, or needlessly subjected to blood-letting (sometimes with fatal consequences) in misguided attempts to restore humoral balance.  This mystery can be attributed partly to external causes: persistent confirmation bias, pervading trust for traditional sources of expert knowledge, and the fact, as Kuhn (1962) observed, that “once it has achieved the status of paradigm, a scientific theory is declared invalid only if an alternative candidate is available to take its place” (p. 77).52  But the primary source of its suasive persistence, I contend, consists internally in its coherence as an ideological cultural system (Geertz, 1964).  Its preoccupation with maintaining the proper quantity of each humoral liquid must be understood in light of the Lacanian dictum concerning the absence of lack in the real—that is, “every perception of a lack or a surplus (‘not enough of this,’ ‘too much of that’) always involves a symbolic universe” (Lacan, 1988, p. 313; Žižek, 1994, p. 11, emphasis in original).  Humorism has little to no epistemic validity to the extent that its objects of knowledge belong to the order of the real, but the calculus is much different if its knowledge claims are confined to symbolic or imaginary objects.  Its rhetorical effectiveness as a cultural system depends upon its ability to obscure this constraint on its referential capacity while remaining ever faithful to it.
      In such cultural systems, the pre-reflective experience of reality occurs through, with, and in (recalling the Eucharistic doxology: per ipsum, et cum ipso, et in ipso) a shared, socially constructed, symbolic order in which cognitive, normative, and affective registers of meaning are integrated by the figures of rhetoric into a unitary (perhaps hypostatic) conceptual framework structured by a grammar of symbols and social facts (Durkheim, 1982; Lévi-Strauss, 1963).  The tropes of analogy and metaphor are particularly important to the overall coherence of a lifeworld conceived in this manner53 because they work structurally to identify the abstract, arbitrary, strange, and uncertain with the familiar, observable, reality-tested, and shared, providing an underlying basis for common sense, judgments of validity, legitimation, and persuasiveness.  To the extent that distinct bodies of knowledge—fields like herbalism and nutrition, along with more distant fields like meteorology and astrology—were integrated into the humoral symbolic universe, an epistemic ‘multiplier effect’ came into play such that a modest symbolic outlay may stimulate a great deal of meaning production mediated through aggregate processes of cultural exchange.54 The mastery of new knowledge that is epistemically anchored in the humoral symbolic order serves as a kind of validation of that order (unless the new knowledge turns out to be a complete flop).  Even if the epistemic content of the humoral order were reduced to mere scholarly custom, this alone might explain its cultural stability insofar as “the person who does not adapt himself to it is subjected to both petty and major inconveniences and annoyances as long as the majority of people he comes in contact with continue to uphold the custom and conform with it” (Weber, 1978, p. 30).  Some annoyances are more blatant than others; in the sixteenth century, for example, the faculty of medicine at the University of Leipzig persuaded civil authorities to ban books written by the medical heretic Paracelsus, whose attempts to overthrow the traditional humoral orthodoxy often drew comparisons to his contemporary, Martin Luther (Pagel, 1982).  Other inconveniences in the realm of science communication are more subtle.  By failing to use the accepted terminology and concepts, clarity suffers, there are fewer opportunities for publication or collaboration, and it becomes more difficult to promote one’s ideas to the wider public.
      Humorism's robust longevity is thus a testament both to its ubiquitous embeddedness in other cultural systems (just as, for Lucretius, the psyche innervates and is embedded in the body), enabling social actors of all levels of theoretical nuance or expertise to work toward mutual understanding by means of its symbolic network (reproducing the symbolic order in the process), and to its casuistic flexibility, i.e., its hermeneutic power to incorporate and explain a very wide range of phenomena, giving it an enormous capacity to employ common observations of reality as inventional resources for encompassing new situations (Burke, 1984a).  For example, in the definitive medical textbook of the medieval period, Avicenna used humoral concepts to elaborate a theory of “emotional aspects, mental capacity, moral attitudes, self-awareness, movements and dreams” (Rastogi, 2012, p. 81).55  Similar efforts continued into the twentieth century, notably including Hans Eysenck’s (1947) four-factor model of personality in which the dimensions of extraversion and neuroticism stand in for temperature and dryness, respectively.  Perhaps the epistemic distance between the world of validated psychometric scales and computer-assisted statistical techniques like orthogonal factor analysis, on one hand, and the 2,500 year-old pre-scientific humoral model, on the other, is smaller than it first seems.
Why did Humorism Fail?
	To explain how humoral pathology eventually came to be rejected, I would like to extend my earlier analogy between the health of a person and the health of a model.  In cancer, the same physiological processes and anatomical elements that allowed one to live and thrive become the vehicle of one’s mortality.  In a similar manner, the same features and capacities that explain the persistence of humorism also facilitated the model’s rhetorical fragmentation and downfall.  The persistence of humorism was due in part to its capacity for doctrinal development, enabling it to accommodate, explain, or otherwise account for new, seemingly inconsistent, discoveries.  As the model was challenged by new empirical observations and material social practices, its adaption process became disordered, leading to an uncontrollable heterogeneous complexification.  Its widespread cultural and epistemic integration required that the model’s growth be even and consistent so that changes could diffuse into the general body of social knowledge.  Theoretical developments provoked by different challenges became inconsistent, slowly splitting the humoral psyche, leading to its progressive epistemic deterioration.  
      The serendipitous discovery by Catholic missionaries in 1630 that a bitter substance in the bark of the cinchona tree, called quinine, can treat effectively the high fever associated with malaria (from the Italian mala aria, ‘bad air,’ once thought to be its source) is one significant example of the kind of challenges the humoral order faced.  At the time, medical authorities believed that all fevers resulted from an excess of bile, which was thought to cause fermentation in the blood, for which the (rather ineffective) treatments of bleeding and purging were indicated.56  Making matters more confusing, the apparently effective extract is a dry powder derived from a tree native to the hot climate of Peru.  One might expect such a substance to amplify, rather than ameliorate, the suffering brought about by a surplus of the quintessentially hot and dry humor.  As it turned out, according to leading seventeenth-century authorities in humoral medicine, the so-called ‘Jesuit’s Powder’ stimulated the flow of bilious secretions through the nervous system, an example of the phenomenon Galen called ‘sympathy,’ which  effected a cure by pushing the malarial fever to its conclusion (Berdoe, 2006).
      The plot further thickened when it was discovered that quinine’s therapeutic efficacy was specific, limited to fevers associated with the discrete disease entity malaria. Why shouldn’t the same sympathetic process resolve other forms of fever? Is the category of ‘discrete disease entity’ part of a larger category that also includes pathology conforming to the old unitary disease concept, or does this new category conceptually replace the old?  Both possibilities would raise new, difficult questions.  Left unanswered, these questions threatened the humoral order with legitimation crisis just as other historical social forces seemed to be aligning against orthodoxy in general (e.g., widespread and frequently violent religious partisanship; sweeping changes in society’s mode of production associated with industrialization; mass dissatisfaction with the institutions of aristocracy and monarchy; exposure to new cultural forms of knowledge about health and remedies associated with the Age of Exploration; an intellectual climate associated with the Enlightenment that favored radical breaks with tradition, etc.).  
      Remarkably, the humoral symbolic order managed to avert the crisis and preserve its hegemonic cultural position by successfully performing the ideological functions of “hiding real contradictions and of reconstituting on an imaginary level a relatively coherent discourse which serves as the horizon of… experience” (Poulantzas, 1973, p. 207).  In doing so, however, it sustained serious damage, as the necessary legitimating discourses and conceptual elaborations were “[reminiscent] of the epicycles used by astronomers to explain variances within the Ptolemaic universe… [and which] did not so much overthrow the wobbling paradigm of Galenic humoral concepts as they supported the ancient edifice with more ‘modern’ knowledge” (Haller, 1994, p. 18, my emphasis).  The epistemic disorder was not cured; it was simply in remission.  Haller’s metaphorical characterization of the order as ‘wobbling’ is particularly insightful because it highlights the degree to which humoral theory was out of balance, in total variance with its own ultimate values.  The humoral order did not so much neutralize the external substantive contradiction between theory and observation as transform it into an internal performative contradiction entailed in the imbalanced and fragmented form in which the values of balance and unity were defended as ultimate terms.  The first contradiction was constituted by a rupture between the registers of the Symbolic and the Real; the second contradiction represented a conflict entirely within the Symbolic, “between a meaning conveyed explicitly and a meaning conveyed by the act itself of conveying” (D. Turner, 1983, p. 26).
      The hegemonic grip of humorism on the institution of medicine began to recede as a result not of theoretical development, but rather of changes in material productive practices and relationships; in other words, base determined superstructure (Marx, 1904).  A vast market existed for new treatments, including herbs discovered in recently colonized parts of the world, as well as the purified chemicals and metals promoted by Paracelsus (1657).  These highly profitable treatments could be rendered intelligible only retrospectively, as medical treatments within the humoral framework.  Medical theory thus “followed the money” (Healy, 2008, p. 15).  As more and more of these treatments were adopted, the medical literature gradually became less focused on pure theory and more interested in empirical observations (Maehle, 1999).  The genre of the ‘case history’ as a medical topos reappeared.  As I shall demonstrate later, the prevalence and emphasis of the ‘case history’ in medical rhetoric as a ‘place’ to look for substantiating evidence at any given time can be seen as a barometer of tension between medical theory and practice.  Appeals to the case are relatively more persuasive to an audience suspicious of the available theoretical paradigm; their suppression is a rhetorical move made by defenders of an orthodoxy, as when the editorial board of the American Journal of Psychiatry, following the promulgation of the new DSM-III nosology, decreed that “single case reports should be published as Letters to the Editor rather than as Clinical Research Reports” (Edelson, 1985; “Single Case Reports,” 1984, p. 852).  
      The ascent of appeals to the case rather than to humoral theory pointed to the discontinuous nature of disease.  From the drama concerning the introduction of quinine, we can see that a radical discovery alone is insufficient to bring about a change in intellectual order.  Before the introduction of a powerful new architectonic, the old regime of knowledge must be delegitimized:
The real revolution in medicine, which set the stage for antibiotics and whatever else we have in the way of effective therapy today… did not begin with the introduction of science into medicine.  That came years later.  Like a good many revolutions, this one began with the destruction of dogma.  It was discovered, sometime in the 1830s, that the greater part of medicine was nonsense. (Thomas, 1995, p. 159)
How was this aporia achieved?  The cacophonous proliferation of cases was coupled with emerging technologies that facilitated novel ways of ‘seeing’ the signs of illness, both in human patients and in the old theoretical orthodoxy.  Physicians had long had the ability to look inside the bodies of individuals post-mortem (though were often prohibited from doing so by religious authorities), but the microscope, the stethoscope, and the practice of histology opened up a whole new vista of morbidity, “[plunging] the gaze of the doctor… into the interior of the body,” a shifting of horizon that would be repeated again in the twentieth century, when new genetic and statistical techniques allowed scientists to ‘see’ in populations a new array of pathological objects (Hacking, 1975; Hedgecoe & Martin, 2008; N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 193).  A new perceptive technology can show the continuous to be discontinuous and visa-versa, potentially producing terministic rupture, “since all laboratory instruments of measurements and observation are devices invented by the symbol-using animal, [and thus] they too necessarily give interpretations in terms of either continuity or discontinuity” (Burke, 1966, p. 49).  Novel technological modes of observation not only enables new objects of knowledge to be seen, but also reveal the contradictions, limitations, and absurdities of the old theoretical orthodoxy (Hogle, 2008).  
The Rise of Scientific Medicine
	Like water coming to a boil that is preceded by rising bubbles, this sudden and dramatic revolution in the nineteenth century was preceded by nascent micro-configurations of knowledge.  These epistemic fragments were not full models of pathology but, rather, terministic sonograms through which one can glimpse the modern concept of disease in an embryonic stage. Two of these emergent frameworks, one emphasizing discontinuity and the other continuity, were of particular importance: an ‘ontological interpretation’ of disease, and a ‘physiological interpretation’ of disease (Kräupl-Taylor, 1982).  According to the ontological interpretation, the vista of pathology is subdivided into discrete disease entities that are distinct from the signs and symptoms revealing their presence.  The physiological interpretation instead focuses on morbid processes as they manifest in the body.  Both interpretations provided important insights necessary for the development of modern medical science.  As medicine moved dialectically from one interpretation to the other, the conceptual integrity of humoral concepts became strained, and with each new rearticulation, shifts in meaning were accompanied by the introduction of emerging modern concepts.  Many ideas and concepts that would become central to modern medical science emerged centuries before their time, but in combination with archaic vestiges of the old order.  These concepts were sometimes discarded or remixed into new discursive assemblages before being taken up in modern form.  
The Ontological Interpretation
      Thomas Sydenham (1682), who was heavily influenced by the findings about quinine and the putative disease entity ‘malaria,’ as well as by the Methodist school of biological classification that began with Italian physician and botanist Andrea Caesalpino (1583), made an articulate case for an “ontological view of disease… [affirming] the existence of natural and unwavering disease entities, separable from the person, and whose presentation was uniform across sufferers” (Boyle, 1990, p. 8).  In no small part due to his novel ontological approach to pathology, Sydenham, the so-called “English Hippocrates” (Noll, 2007, p. x), contributed greatly to medicine.  Before Sydenham, many medical authorities had a difficult time grasping the idea of a discrete disease entity, conflating it with a discrete disease expression.  An illness state involving several distinct symptoms implied a holistic pathology, especially in the absence of any distinctive pathological features (e.g., Koplik spots, uniquely characteristic of measles).  Sydenham’s approach to nosology was built around the “presupposition that clinical findings fall into easily identifiable constellations of signs and symptoms that can be recognized through their natural histories” (Cutter, 2003, p. 37).  Avicenna had hinted at the concept of syndrome (unaltered from the Greek syndrom? [????????], meaning a disorderly crowd running together), but Sydenham explicitly articulated and significantly developed it (Millon, 2004).57   The basic idea is that, by closely observing a large number of patients and keeping precise records of their co-occurring pathological characteristics, it is possible to identify distinctive forms of disease that share a common set of causes and, presumably, should respond to the same treatment (as with malaria and quinine) (Blashfield, 1984).  
      Sydenham’s views caught on in part because they were popular with physicians who, transformed into scientists by his revolutionary methodology, were eager to take up the important job of systematically recording the wide range of elements that work together to produce the disease processes in their patients (Boyle, 1990).  This shift in medical research and training resulted in new institutional and professional norms emphasizing careful, detailed clinical observations (Kräupl-Taylor, 1979).  These developments prompted a biopolitical reading of the Hippocratic corpus.  Sydenham collected data on major disease outbreaks in London from 1661-1675 and detected an association between specific syndromes and the time of year, providing empirical support for an ancient hypothesis, revived by his contemporary, Robert Boyle, that the seasons (relating to the humors) were epidemiologically significant (D. Porter, 1998).58  The idea of studying populations to identify risk factors for disease influenced the development in the following century of an emergent mode of governance involving “the dramatic expansion in the scope of government, featuring an increase in the number and size of the governmental calculation mechanisms” (A. Hunt & Wickham, 1994, p. 76).
      As distinctive as Sydenham’s position was, he did not abandon humorism, routinely resorting to humoral explanations whenever necessary, particularly for acute conditions that, he posited, often resulted from atmospheric ‘miasmata’ disturbing the humors (Kräupl-Taylor, 1979).  Though the discrete disease entity represented a distinct move away from holistic pathology, Sydenham believed its manifestation as a syndromal complex pointed to a multifactorial etiology and pathogenesis, with multiple simultaneous influences acting on a patient and influencing the course of the morbid process (Kräupl-Taylor, 1982).  Neither an imbalance in the humors, an invasion of a pathogen (i.e., some inorganic corpuscular substance originating underground), a distressing life event, nor any other lone stimulus was sufficient to trigger the onset of an illness, though each could contribute to one’s susceptibility.  Similarly, though the outbreak of epidemics eluded reliable prediction, he identified several risk factors he believed to be significant: excessive humidity or dryness, extremely cold or hot temperatures, and the presence of “vapors” emanating from “the inward bowels of the earth” (cited by Dewhurst, 1966, pp. 66–67).  
Evolution of Hysteria
      These neo-Hippocratic sources of disease were discarded by subsequent physicians, only to be rearticulated less than a hundred years later in slightly revised form.  The principles of modern chemistry were applied to the old humoral framework, fusing moral judgment and somatic pathology within vaporous imagery:
[In] acid vapors the particles are mobile, and even incapable of rest, but their activity is weak, without effect; when they are distilled, nothing remains in the alembic but an insipid phlegm… [One] would consider the vapors that rise from the blood to the brain and that have degenerated into an acid and corrosive vapor… [to be] a chemistry of the humors. …Certain particularly volatile animal spirits are alkaline salts that move with great speed and transform themselves into vapors when they become too tenuous; but there are other vapors that are volatized acids; the ether gives these latter enough movement to carry them to the brain and the nerves where, ‘encountering the alkalis, they cause infinite ills.’ Strange, the qualitative instability of these [vaporous] illnesses; strange, the confusion of their dynamic properties and the secret nature of their chemistry! …The space in which [the vaporous] assumed its dimensions was…that of the body, in the coherence of its organic values and its moral values.  (Foucault, 2001, pp. 122, 142–143)
Just as the people of London in Sydenham’s time suffered from an epidemic brought on by vapors from deep underground, many wealthy and urbane women living in Paris suffered from an epidemic brought on by vapors that emanated from their own inward bowels (or furor uterinus, an agitated womb):
For more than a century, the vapors have been endemic in large cities; most women who take pleasure in the comforts of life are vaporous, and one might say that they purchase a series of languid infirmities with the vast riches that they so enjoy.59 (Raulin, 1758, p. viii, my translation)  
Men were less often afflicted, but when they were it was usually their fault as well: “Men become vaporous just like women when their nerves lose their natural firmness;60 it sometimes happens that they were born with their feeble temperaments, but more often than not they become weak through acts of debauchery, exhaustion, idleness, mental strain, etc.” (Raulin, 1758, p. 42, my translation).61
	Some commentators suggested that this epidemic was a form of disease unique to capitalist modernity: “We have few good books on the vaporous diseases…[and] the reason is simple; it is that these diseases are new, their progress having followed that of the vast population of Paris and its heart of luxury” (Beauchêne, 1783, pp. 8–9, my translation).62  Others linked the outbreak to older disease states (e.g., melancholia, hysteria), while still emphasizing its novel epidemic status:  
Melancholy is not exactly a new disease, but in no other century was it so widespread, nor did it have the same level of intensity; thus we can look at it as a new plague. It is necessary to bring all efforts to destroy it, as was done successfully for venereal diseases. (Bressy, 1789, pp. ii–iii, my translation)63
All agreed that this was a bourgeois ‘plague,’ afflicting women whose “mode of life [was seen by] physicians…as overrefined and soft,” as well as effeminate men “who had ‘degenerated’ to a similarly delicate temperament” (Vila, 1998, p. 229).  The couches of the Victorian era were designed with the vaporous woman in mind, as even the slightest stimulus could cause her to become faint, overwhelmed with emotion; other prominent symptoms included “edema or hyperemia, …nervousness, insomnia, sensations of heaviness in the abdomen, muscle spasms, shortness of breath, loss of appetite for food or sex with the approved male partner, and [a general] tendency to cause trouble for others” (Maines, 2001, p. 23).
	The connection between Sydenham and the pathologically feminine Parisians of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries goes far beyond the suggestion that vapors (of some sort) cause illness.  The eighteenth century vaporous diseases were based on a syndrome Sydenham identified as hysteria in the seventeenth century, a name it would regain in the nineteenth century as a focal point of study for Jean-Martin Charcot, Pierre Janet, and Sigmund Freud (Breuer & Freud, 2000; Charcot, 1971; Janet, 1920).  Hysteria is as old as Western medicine itself, but Sydenham was the first to conceive of hysteria as a disease of the mind (Bronfen, 1998).  The conventional wisdom in 1600 was that it was caused by a mal-positioned womb (Rousseau, 1993).  The name ‘hysteria’ comes from the Greek word for uterus, hystera (??????).  The Hippocratic corpus lists a variety of symptoms thought to be related to the movements of an excessively dry womb.  Sexual intercourse, in order to add moisture to the womb, was the recommended treatment: Nubat illa et morbus effugiet, ‘let her marry and the disease shall disappear’ (Kerber, 2005, p. 275, my translation; King, 1993).  
	Sydenham’s (1682) careful study (particularly his observation that men and women equally exhibited the constellation of hysterical symptoms) led him to believe that the problem was not in the womb, but rather in the brain.64  Nevertheless, the concept could not escape its gendered roots, and has invited feminist readings, according to which the hysterical women of the nineteenth century “epitomize universal female oppression” (Showalter, 1998, p. 10).  On the other hand, Herndl (1988) suggested that hysteria “has come to figure a sort of rudimentary feminism and feminism a kind of articulate hysteria” (p. 54).  The tensions and ambivalences entailed in gendered diagnoses recur, for example, in the DSM-5 diagnoses of compulsive buying disorder (CBD) and premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD), which some suggest present women as irrational, with poor impulse control and monthly episodes of emotional instability (Saedi, 2012).
      Sydenham noted that hysteria (understood metaphysically as an independent disease entity) could simulate the symptoms of several organic diseases, e.g., convulsions, heart palpitations related to anxiety, paralysis similar to that produced by stroke, and unexplained pain similar to kidney stones. The ontological assumptions that the same symptoms could have different causes and that the same cause could present with different symptoms enabled Sydenham to identify and catalogue the various forms of this disorder as had never been done before (Schneck, 1957).  Sydenham focused less on individual symptoms than the overall syndromal complex, and his ontological interpretation of disease allowed him to distinguish between the symptoms and the disorder.  Before Sydenham, a physician observing one case of syncope caused by orthostatic hypotension and another case of hysterical fainting would not have been able meaningfully to distinguish between the two manifestations of illness.  A recent encomium testifies to the prescience of Sydenham’s clinical pictures of hysterical syndromes, and more broadly to the enduring significance and influence of Sydenham’s approach on contemporary nosological debate in psychiatry:
The careful and systematic manner of his descriptions of hysterical phenomena was so comprehensive that little can be added today to what he said three centuries ago.  He recognized that hysteria was among the most common chronic diseases, and… he also suggested that differential diagnosis between real biological diseases and those generated by the mind could only be made if the patient’s psychological state could be thoroughly known.  He was among the most successful in illustrating that emotions can generate and simulate physical disorders.  In his efforts to formulate a syndromal pattern for numerous disorders, he extended the range of his observations to include not only the patient’s dispositions, emotions, and defenses, but the family context within which they arose… [in order] to determine the overall pathogenesis of certain syndromes, largely through the use of both physical and psychological phenomena. (Millon & Simonsen, 2010, p. 23)
Hence, the concept of vaporous diseases that appeared after Sydenham was a throwback to a previous era, leading physicians away from the psychogenic nature of hysteria.
      Charcot was less than prescient when he wrote in an 1888 letter to Freud: “Rest assured, hysteria is coming along, and one day it will occupy gloriously the important place it deserves in the sun” (cited by Micale, 1993, p. 496).  Nonetheless, the syndrome once associated with the signifier ‘hysteria’ is still a source of diagnostic controversy, and the array of issues currently under discussion was almost entirely anticipated by Sydenham in the seventeenth century.  There is certainly some truth to Guillain’s (1949) suggestion that “in reality, the patients have not changed since the time of Charcot—only the words used to describe them have changed” (p. 147, my translation).65  In the DSM-IV and ICD-10 nosologies, hysteria is known as ‘conversion disorder’ (classed with the somatoform disorders in the former and with the dissociative disorders in the later), and is characterized by “unexplained” symptoms such as (non-epileptic) seizures, unusual movements, fainting, weakness, and sensory disturbances.  While the symptoms “suggest a neurological or other general medical condition,” in fact “psychological factors are judged to be associated with the symptoms or deficits” (American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 445).  Diagnosis requires a “thorough medical investigation… to rule out an etiologically neurological or general medical condition,” as the symptoms of conversion disorder “typically do not conform to known anatomical pathways and physiological mechanisms, but instead follow the individual’s conceptualization of a condition” (1994, sec. 300.11).  
      The name ‘conversion disorder’ itself refers to the basic hypothesis that the symbolic resolution of unconscious psychological conflicts can manifest somatically—in other words, a psychological conflict that cannot be resolved consciously is ‘converted’ into a complex of physical symptoms (Nicholson & Kanaan, 2009).  The DSM-5 Somatic Symptom Disorders Workgroup recommended that the disorder be renamed ‘functional neurological disorder’ (American Psychiatric Association, 2011b).66 Apparently, the name ‘conversion disorder’ is too closely associated with the old psychoanalytic heresy:
Although long dominant, the conversion hypothesis… has little supportive empirical evidence.  Even the notion that the etiology of these symptoms is wholly psychological may be scientifically incorrect.  For example, functional brain imaging studies showing findings such as contralateral thalamic hypoactivity in hemisensory conversion encourage us to understand conversion symptoms from a brain as well as a mind perspective… [The] name “conversion disorder” has not been widely accepted by either nonpsychiatrists or patients. We therefore need a name that sidesteps an unhelpful brain/mind dichotomy… For the majority of patients psychological factors can be identified, but not for all… In practice, conversion disorder is usually diagnosed after a neurologist has identified a symptom as “nonorganic” because of clinical findings of incongruity with disease or internal consistency… [We] suggest that conversion disorder be renamed “functional neurological disorder” and that the requirement for the exclusion of feigning and identification of associated psychological factors be relegated to the accompanying text... Together these changes have the potential to foster collaboration between psychiatrists and neurologists. (J. Stone, LaFrance, Levenson, & Sharpe, 2010, pp. 626–627)
A few brief observations about this official line of reasoning are in order.  The authors take for granted that ‘psychological’ phenomena are non-organic, as if the activities of the mind could be wholly independent of the activities of the brain.  Otherwise, the observation that ‘functional brain imaging studies’ show activity of some sort in the brains of patients with conversion disorder could not serve to refute the claim that the etiology of the symptoms is “wholly psychological.”  This is a vulgar straw-person argument—not even René Descartes, and most certainly not Freud, would accept the premise that some “wholly psychological” phenomenon could occur without any corresponding material/organic activity.67  This reasoning mistake means that, instead of seeking to elucidate the neurobiological basis of psychological phenomena, this hyper-material turn is made seemingly for its own sake.  The irony in the subsequent comment concerning the need to sidestep an “unhelpful brain/mind dichotomy” is almost overwhelming.  Over against the approach of DSM-5, Sydenham had strongly resisted the urge to reduce the syndromal complex to either organic or psychological morbid processes (Schneck, 1957).  
      The concern for the patients’ acceptance of the diagnosis is interesting, although, if the ‘conversion’ hypothesis is correct, attempts to over-accommodate the patients in this regard may be anti-therapeutic, as the incidence of hysteria dramatically declined once the conversion hypothesis became well known to the public (Micale, 1993).  There are many ways to interpret this finding, but the most parsimonious is that a population is less vulnerable to hysteria when the latter is understood in psychodynamic terms than when it is commonly believed to be a neurological disorder.  Finally, it is somewhat strange that a neurologist's failure to discover a neurological problem would be a defining characteristic of a ‘neurological disorder,’ functional or otherwise.68  In any event, the various twists and turns through which ‘hysterical affection’ has been ‘converted’ into a neuro-functional disorder were possible only because of Sydenham’s careful studies, and though the DSM-5 approach rejects a strict ontological interpretation pointing toward some vague ineffable physiology, the differences between Sydenham’s hysteria and the contemporary form are more cosmetic than substantive.69  
The Physiological Interpretation
      Why did the seventeenth century mental illness of hysteria change into a collection of neurological vaporous diseases in the eighteenth century?  There were many factors, but perhaps most important was a growing interest in and understanding of functional physiological processes that resulted from the introduction of scientific methodology to medicine.  The material practices that Sydenham inspired gave rise to a terministic screen focused on morbid physiological processes.  A physiological interpretation of pathology appealed to the post-metaphysical sensibility of the Enlightenment, expressed famously in 1748 by David Hume:
If we take in our hand any volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?  No.  Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence?  No.  Commit it then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion. (Hume, 1993, p. 114, emphasis in the original)
Ontological interpretations in general were no longer in vogue with the intelligentsia by the eighteenth century.  Thirteen years after Hume published his Enquiry concerning human understanding, Giovanni Morgagni, now regarded as the father of anatomical pathology, identified lesions in the organs, rather than humoral imbalance, as the cause of disease (Morgagni, 1903).  In 1761, he published his path-breaking text De sedibus et causis morborum, in which he aggregated the physiological data extant in the literature along with the anatomical observations he and his teacher, Antonio Valsalva had made in the preceding decades.70  Its publication revolutionized medicine: By placing anatomy at the foundation of general pathology, “medicine was elevated to the rank of a natural science” (Virchow, 1958a, p. 178).  
      In 1858, less than a century later, after cataloging the various kinds of tissue and their cellular natures, Rudolph Virchow delivered a series of famous lectures in which he established a new model of disease based on cellular pathology that quickly became dominant within the new modern institution of clinical medicine (Turk, 1993).  In his early days, Virchow explicitly rejected the ontological view of disease in favor of a physiological conception.  According to this essentially nominalist view, diseases do not exist independently, but, rather, subsist in dysfunctional bodily processes.  The old humoral model was essentially physiological, though not scientific.  Instead of seeing discrete disease entities with their own unique course and treatment, a physiologist sees somatic processes that deviate from the norm, lying in a continuous spectrum from healthy to diseased.  For the 26-year-old Virchow, seeking in 1847 to define ‘scientific medicine,’ disease entities are “neither self-subsistent, circumscribed, autonomous organisms, nor entities which have forced their way into the body, nor parasites rooted on it, but… [rather] they represent only the course of physiological phenomena under altered conditions” (Virchow, 1958b, p. 26).  When he reached the age of 73, however, Virchow felt less of a need to militate against ontological readings of his cellular model:
Aside from cells, there are no histogenetic or organopoietic substances. This conception is expressly ontological.  That is its merit, not its deficiency.  There is in actuality an ens morbi [disease entity], just as there is an ens vitae [living entity]; in both instances a cell or cell-complex has the claim to be thus designated. (Virchow, 1958a, p. 207)
Essentially, then, Virchow read realism into the nominalist ontological interpretation.  Discrete disease entities exist and are co-equal with physiological disordered processes.
      To understand how Virchow was able to advance these seemingly contradictory positions about pathology, one must take note of his ultimate driving concern, precisely the same concern held by the developers of DSM-5: the development of a conceptual framework of pathology best suited to “pave the way for much-needed scientific progress” (Hyman, 2011, p. 5).  If disease is understood ontologically, where is it located and what is its nature?  The elder Virchow in 1895 drew a connection between serum therapy (in which a serum from an immunized animal is used to treat a disease) and the old humoral model:
Enthusiasts see here a final triumph of humoral pathology, although a humoral pathology quite different from any preceding it.  The old humoral pathology cannot come into question at all, but only one of the later forms—hematopathology [i.e., a branch of cellular pathology that focuses on hematopoietic cells, which originate in bone marrow and give rise to red and white blood cells and platelets], to be precise… The doctrine of putrid infections (septicemia) had gradually passed over into general knowledge; everyone assumed that putrescent substances exerted a harmful effect and sometimes caused new putrefactive processes in the body.  But no one had the right to conclude from this doctrine that the tissues of the body—let us say the cells for brevity—could be disregarded, and that a putrid infection was nothing more than an abnormal condition of the blood.  The blood only contains the causes of the tissue disturbance; the disease is not the blood, but is rather the effect of the cause on the cells or tissues. (1958a, p. 213)
The humoral (functional) pathology had located disease in the fluids of the body, while the anatomical (ontological) pathology had located disease in the body’s solid parts.  The physical properties of solidity and fluidity seem to stand in respectively for the concrete discontinuity of the ontological perspective and the dynamic continuity of the physiological perspective.
      Virchow reconciled these conflicting views by first locating life within the cell, composed of solid organelles immersed in cytoplasmic fluid and surrounded by a membrane.  The cell is thus the scene of a biological drama in which cellular components are agents engaging in the various acts that constitute and sustain life.  Its entelic ‘purpose,’ understood as an Aristotelian final cause, is to continue living, and thus the acts must proceed in an orderly fashion consistent with the ‘normal’ vital mode of operation for a cell of its type.  When, for whatever reason, the dynamic cellular processes or structures of the cell deviate from this norm, that deviation constitutes disease.  Disease is directly identified with the disordered cell, rather than depicted as a pattern of various signs and symptoms.  Instead of ‘tobacco smoking syndrome,’ we have a cancerous lung.  Though it becomes a bit more complicated when applied to behavior rather than apparent cellular structure, this interpretation of pathology provides a relatively objective criterion with which one can detect the presence of disease: dysfunctional deviancy.71  
      According to this perspective, life is simultaneously a process and a concrete material entity (that is, the living cell, which comes from a pre-existing cell).  Thus, the disordered (unordentliche, sometimes translated as ‘deranged’) cell serves as the concrete representation of disease (Virchow, 1958b, p. 37).  The pathological cellular condition comprised for Virchow the disease entity, and the point of diagnosis was to identify and name the cellular abnormality.  This contrasts with the bacteriological view that had emerged by the end of the nineteenth century, according to which a disease entity was defined by the cause of pathological changes—invading bacteria—regardless of the particular presentation of the illness.  This model of pathology, which is ontological in nature, introduced the idea that a single disease entity could produce an array of pathological changes, such that in two individual patients, the same disease might present with completely different symptoms or even be asymptomatic.  As we will see in the next section, these various terministic screens influenced those attempting to make sense of madness, even though there was no corresponding way to differentiate forms of madness on the basis of cellular abnormalities (and even today mental illness by and large cannot be diagnosed on the basis of physiological testing).  
Reconciliation of Ontology and Physiology
        As advances in medical science changed the way we measured and observed disease, an ontological interpretation was applied whenever disease could be linked to an external referent—either etiological, e.g., an invading microbe, or pathogenetic, e.g.,  a characteristic course over time (as its temporal extension is external to its manifestation physiologically at any single point in time).  Its usefulness depends on how well a given disease entity seems to fit its external anchor given the constraints of state of the art medical technology.  The less physicians could predict about the cause or course of an illness, the more carefully they attended to the observed physiological phenomena.  It has often been the case that a successful ontological interpretation points to a new physiological area of interest to study, and a successful physiological interpretation leads to an ontological interpretation of the same disorder based on the newly grasped knowledge.
      As a terministic screen with an expansive circumference, the ontological interpretation today pervades everyday speech:
Usually, we do not give it a second thought, when we talk of ‘catching’ a disease, of being ‘attacked’ by it, ‘struck’ by it (‘stroke,’ ‘apoplexy’), ‘seized’ by it (‘seizure,’ ‘epilepsy’).  We speak of disease ‘carriers’ who are not ill themselves, of diseases which are ‘transmitted’ from person to person or parent to child, which move as ‘epidemics’ from place to place or lurk as ‘endemic’ dangers waiting for the unimmunized traveler.  (Kräupl-Taylor, 1979, p. 6)
These idioms are so appealing in part because they help us ‘order the chaos’ caused by medical ailments, providing some psychological comfort by offering “a reassuringly simply solution to the apparent chaos of physical suffering: a number of seemingly disparate phenomena can be accounted for and perhaps abolished by reference to one underlying cause” (Boyle, 1990, p. 9).  No matter how advanced our knowledge of physiology becomes, it will be difficult to stray too far from an ontological understanding of disease because of how embedded it is in our linguistic lifeworld.  On the other hand, advances in our understanding of human biological processes at the molecular and genomic levels make the physiological interpretation equally entrenched.  Changing paradigms in modern medicine is therefore less about adopting an ontological or physiological interpretation than choosing which of the two to prioritize.  Scientific discussions of novel disease constructs can shift back and forth between an ontological or physiological emphasis, often without any apparent insight about this indeterminacy on the part of the discussants.  We will see this phenomenon in the next chapter, as those debating early interventions in psychosis cannot seem to decide if they are discussing a psychosis risk syndrome or the prodromal phase of a psychotic disorder.  Both terministic screens are required to navigate the contemporary discourses of medicine.  
	The most successful paradigms in medicine integrate both ontological and physiological terminologies.  This is true even more generally: The discovery of calculus by Newton and Leibniz, for example, brought the continuous and discrete together in a single terminology, solving Zeno’s paradoxes and providing the mathematical framework for modern Newtonian physics (Kondratieva, 2007).  Similarly, continuous and discrete physical terminologies are integrated in the theories of quantum physics.  At the risk of drawing Alan Sokal's (1996) ire, I would suggest that, notwithstanding the objective physical reality of particle-wave duality, there is a discursive phenomenon at work that is operating at an even more general level of abstraction than the physical or mathematical.  Reality, whether physical or social, is neither discrete nor continuous until it is rendered so in language.  
	Our terminologies come into being not as a result of discovering significant objects (that is, objects to be signified) that actually are continuous or discrete in themselves, but rather as a result of humanity's invention of the negative (Burke, 1963).  As eighteenth century naturalist Charles Bonnet put it, “If there are no cleavages in nature, it is evident that our classifications are not hers” (as cited in Lovejoy, 1936, p. 230).  Similarly, Cassirer (1944) suggests, “Nature as such only contains individual and diversified phenomena.  If we subsume these phenomena under class concepts and general laws we do not describe facts of nature.  Every system is a work of art—a result of conscious creative activity” (p. 209).  Either kind of terminology might be more or less ‘accurate’—that is, capable of encompassing a situation in a way that satisfies the rhetorical motives giving rise to the symbolic action in the first place (Burke, 1974).  While noumenal objects are neither discontinuous nor continuous, phenomenal objects obey the structure we give to them.  An account of some phenomenon that is produced wholly within a single terminology is bound to be an incomplete, partial reading.  Therefore, epistemic revolutions tend to come at times when rhetors have discovered a new terminology that accounts for and reconciles two distinct terminologies by which discontinuous and discrete approaches had been divided.
      Any successful integration must organize the symbolic field clearly and efficiently so that the terminologies are appropriate to the situations that call for their use without redundancy.  It must find a way around the confusion and miscommunication associated with incompatible epistemologies.  The integrated terminologies must be made to enrich and complement, rather than cancel, one another.  The new terminology certainly will still emphasize either continuity or discontinuity, but in a way that transcends the differences of the older terminologies, a “dialectical resolution by reduction to an ultimate order” (Burke, 1969b, p. 207).  What is needed is a new way of understanding the world that can be condensed, if only metaphorically, into some ultimate symbol under which the previous terminologies can organize.  The new terminology must be clear to all parties, something that everyone can access for the first time at once, and which promises to be epistemically productive.  As this chapter continues, we will see how these criteria apply to later epistemic developments on the road to psychiatric modernity.
      For biological medicine in the nineteenth century, cellular pathology provided a terminology that reconciles the ontological and physiological interpretations.  It is not merely a variant of the old humoral order with an updated empirical grounding; rather, it is a new model in which disease is a disturbance not of the whole body but of one discrete part.  Any present humoral rhetoric circulates around an ontological terminology of discrete disease entities, and though a disease is not defined by its cause or course, it is recognized that diseases have specific causes and courses.  The signs and symptoms of a syndromal complex were joined with a physiological understanding of morbid processes within the unifying image of the deranged cell.
Psychiatric Antecedents
      Despite the achievements of cellular pathology, it seemed more or less inapplicable to mental illness.  The Cartesian mind was unitary and immaterial; that madness could result from disordered brain cells was inconceivable.72  Two major historical developments produced the epistemic shift that facilitated the birth of psychiatry.  First, an alternative view of the mind emerged from the Scottish Enlightenment in the form of faculty psychology.  Developed by Thomas Reid as an epistemological theory, faculty psychology was based on the assumption that each individual operation of the mind (e.g., perception, emotion, memory, will, appetite, etc.) was driven by an independent mental faculty (Reid, 1785).  These ideas were taken up by French alienists and were influential in discussions about the nature of madness in the early nineteenth century, in addition to forming the basis of the phrenology movement (Boutroux, 1897; Brooks, 1976; Marková, 2005).  Both alienism and the phrenology movement also were influenced by the growing physiognomic tradition, according to which one could infer an individual's personality and character systematically from his or her external appearance (Lavater, 1789).  
      The phrenologists suggested that different mental functions were located in different regions of the brain (primarily around its outer surface), and that variations of these functions corresponded to the external topography of the skull (Kosslyn & Andersen, 1995).  Though the latter assumption was discredited, phrenology was “the first ‘scientific’ effort made to analyze the underlying brain structure from which character and personality might be derived” (Millon & Simonsen, 2010, p. 21).  In a series of lectures throughout Europe at the beginning of the nineteenth century, an early exponent of phrenology, Franz Joseph Gall, introduced to a wide audience the idea that cognitive functions are localized in neuroanatomy (Breidbach, 2001).  A few decades later, anatomical discoveries about the structure and function of the dorsal and ventral roots of the spinal nerve led to an anatomical exegesis of the reflex arc, demonstrating that the nervous system was the source of at least some human behaviors (Hall, 1843).  Two decades later, with the discovery that the destruction of a specific region of the brain causes aphasia, this finding was extrapolated to brain function (Sechenov, 1863).  The functionally differentiated mind of faculty psychology and the efforts by alienists and phrenologists to study its physiological implications lined up with the discovery of the functionally localized central nervous system to forge a new category of epistemological figures and objects of knowledge.
      The second major development was institutional, namely, the “establishment at the beginning of the [nineteenth] century of a new mode of exclusion and confinement of the madman in a psychiatric hospital” (Foucault, 1972, p. 40).  This development had its roots in the seventeenth century, when those deemed to be mad (that is, unemployed) were imprisoned and forced to labor so that they would not remain ‘idle’ (Foucault, 2001).  Madness was regarded as a source of danger and a sign of inhumanity, understood neither medically nor morally, for “the disturbance of his reason restored the madman to the immediate kindness of nature by a return to animality” (p. 75).  At the end of the eighteenth century, the first hospitals came into existence, spurred by the moral movement in medicine that sought to transform “hostels where the sick went to die [into] institutions dedicated to providing a therapeutic milieu” (Healy, 1997, p. 32).  Corresponding to this development, Philippe Pinel is usually credited with unchaining the inmates of l'Hôpital Bicêtre (an asylum near Paris), though this was actually the work of Jean-Baptiste Pussin, who was superintendent in 1797.  Pinel, after having apprenticed himself to Pussin at Bicêtre, became superintendent of the Hospice de la Salpêtrière in 1795 and in 1800, shocked by the inhumane treatment of the mentally ill (so the typical narrative goes), followed in Pussin’s footsteps by banning the use of chains as restraints (Cousin, Garrabe, & Morozov, 2008; Gerard, 1997; Pinel, 2008; Walsh, 1913).73
	The new institution of the psychiatric hospital facilitated the transformation of the asylum inmate into a new object of medical knowledge, the mentally ill patient.  Rose and Abi-Rached (2013) suggest that these institutions “seemed to confer some homogeneity upon those disparate individuals—displaced, desolate, despairing, deranged—who were collected within its walls” (p. 115).  Two important features of the new clinical gaze allowed madness to be seen differently than ever before.  First, asylums enabled alienists to observe pathological processes temporally, drawing attention to another aspect of disease: its course over time.  Second, observing the mad alongside one another revealed clearly that insanity manifested in many distinct ways (Healy, 1997; N. S. Rose, 2007).  For the first time, it became possible to observe the symptoms, course, and outcome of a large sample of mentally ill patients, leading Pinel (1807) to advocate the use of data driven experimental methods and statistical analysis in medical research:
In medicine it is difficult to come to any agreement if we do not attach a precise meaning to the word ‘experiment,’ since everyone praises his own results and more or less only cites the facts in their favor.  For an experiment to be genuine and conclusive and serve as a solid basis for any method of treatment, it must be carried out on a large number of patients following the same general rules and a pre-determined order.  It must also be based on a consistent series of observations made with extreme care and repeated for a number of years with some kind of regularity.  Finally, it should report all of the findings, assigning as much weight to results that are favorable as to results that are not.74  Suffice it to say a medical experiment must be founded on the theory of probabilities, which has already been applied so successfully to civil life, and on which the methods of treating the sick must henceforth rely if they are to be established on a solid foundation.75  (pp. 169–170, my translation)
These four changes—the new idea that disease was varied in kind and could be classified on the basis of deranged anatomy (down to the cellular level); the new understanding that the mind was differentiated in function and, anatomically, so was the brain; the realization that at least some (if not all) behaviors were mediated by activity in the central nervous system; and the ability repeatedly to observe large numbers of mentally ill patients whose symptoms over time appeared quite varied, regularly record the findings, and compare data over time—converged to inspire the first modern systematic attempts to articulate a nosology of madness within the framework of institutional practices that “came to be known as clinical medicine” (T. D. Murphy, 1981, p. 308, emphasis in the original).
The Emergent Assembly of Psychiatry
      The first major classification system to emerge from this convergent set of factors was Pinel’s 1806 Treatise on Insanity, which divided madness into five categories: dementia, idiocy, mania with delirium, mania without delirium, and melancholia (P. J. Cowen, Harrison, & Burns, 2012).  In all cases, however, Pinel thought the patient completely insane.  This changed with the nosological system produced by Pinel’s student Jean-Étienne Dominique Esquirol.  After distinguishing madness from the humoral temperaments that were not pathological (although they might increase one’s susceptibility to psychopathology), Esquirol (1838b) divided mental illness into two categories, insanity and partial insanity.  The latter group included monomania (‘partial delirium’) and lypemania (‘melancholy with delirium’),
chronic cerebral affections, unattended by fever, and characterized by a partial lesion of the intelligence, affections or will.  At one time, the intellectual disorder is confined to a single object, or a limited number of objects.  The patients seize upon a false principle, which they pursue without deviating from logical reasonings, and from which they deduce legitimate consequences, which modify their affections, and the acts of their will.  Aside from this partial delirium, they think, reason and act, like other men… [Among those suffering from affective monomania, by] plausible motives, [and] by very reasonable explanations, they justify the actual condition of their sentiments, and excuse the strangeness and inconsistency of their conduct… In a third class of cases, a lesion of the will exists.  The patient is drawn away from his accustomed course, to the commission of acts, to which neither reason nor sentiment determine, which conscience rebukes, and which the will has no longer the power to restrain.  The actions are involuntary, instinctive, irresistible… The monomaniac is gay, petulant, rash, audacious.  The lypemaniac is sorrowful, calm, diffident, fearful... The course of monomania is more acute, its duration shorter, and its termination more favorable, unless there are complications. The contrary holds true in lypemania.  In this, the delirium seems to depend more particularly upon some abdominal lesion; while in the other, it appears to be caused more immediately, by the anormal condition of the brain… [We] need not confound these two pathological conditions, nor impose upon them the same name, if we desire precision in medical language… Partial delirium is a phenomenon so remarkable, that the more we observe it, the more we are astonished, that a man who feels, reasons, and acts, like the rest of the world, should feel, reason and act no more like other men, upon a single point? (Esquirol, 1838b, pp. 320–321)
Several things about this division are noteworthy.  Esquirol assumes that the sub-varieties of monomania correspond to psychic ‘lesions’ (the extent to which this was meant metaphorically is unclear), and his division of intellect, will, and affect match the original treble division of Reid’s psychological faculties, and can be seen still in the contemporary categories of cognitive, affective, and conduct disorders.  Esquirol provides an early example of the strained attempt to combine psychological and neurological objects in one nosological system.  The explicit rationale for this nosology, with its category errors, is the need for ‘precision in medical language.’  Through this precision, a form of illness that no one has been able to see before becomes remarkably, even astonishingly, clear.  Like the stethoscope, this classification is designed to be a technology for seeing a hybrid object of medical knowledge.  
	Second, Esquirol justifies the principle division between monomania and lypemania on the basis of their course and prognosis.  This represents a significant development of the syndrome concept, which originally denoted a synchronic semiotic pattern.  This innovation will become very important in the development of dementia praecox, to which I shall turn shortly.  Esquirol's treatment of the category of temporal course contains an echo of humoral thinking:
After Hippocrates, Areteus and Celsus assure us, that summer and autumn produce rage...  Dementia appears in winter.  Charles VI became insane after having been exposed to the sun...  Excess cold causes the same disorders; a truth illustrated in the experience of our troops during their disastrous retreat from Russia, when many French soldiers were seized with phrenetic delirium, and even mania...  Heat, like cold, acts upon the insane, with this difference, that the continuance of warmth augments the excitement, while cold prolongs the depression.  Great atmospheric commotions excite and exasperate the insane.  A house for the insane is most disturbed... at the period of the equinoxes...  The influence of the seasons extends even to the course of the insanity.  There are individuals who pass the summer in a state of prostration or agitation; whilst in the winter they are in an opposite condition...  Insanity, which appears in spring and summer, has an acute course.  If not speedily cured, it terminates in the winter.  The monomania and mania of autumn, terminate only in the spring.  Summer is more favorable to the cure of dementia...  (Esquirol, 1838b, pp. 31–32)  
Esquirol based these conclusions on observational data recorded at the Salpêtrière hospital over a nine year period by alienists following Sydenham's suggestions to look for relationships between clinical signs and the time of year.
	Third, Esquirol implies that any behavior resulting from one of these mental ‘lesions’ is beyond the patient's control.  This remains the core legal principle by which defendants can avoid culpability for crimes associated with psychiatric illness (‘not guilty by reason of mental disease or defect’).  So many of the varieties of monomania Esquirol identifies are associated with criminality, including murder, theft, and rape, or as the DSM-5 Paraphilias Subworkgroup proposed to call it, ‘coercive paraphilia,’ which I discuss extensively in Chapter 4 (D. Thornton, 2010).  
	Fourth, the very idea of lypemania, literally a 'sadness-mania,' inverts the traditional traditional binary opposition between melancholia and mania that traces back to Hippocrates.  In this way, it is stunningly modern.  Healy suggests that in proposing “a selective disorder of mood, Esquirol all but created modernity.  This was the cornerstone on which the modern edifice of depression has since been erected” (1997, p. 33).  Although the concept of monomania is no longer extant scientifically, it remains in the popular culture in words like ‘pyromania,’ ‘kleptomania,’ and ‘nymphomania’: “[The] survival to this day of this use of the mania suffix indicates where one of the corpses on the road to modernity is buried” (Healy, 1997, p. 33).  But as radical as Esquirol's monomania concept was, traces of the humoral model appear in his invocation of melancholy, along with the suggestion that lypemania (‘sadness-mania’) involves some problem in the stomach.  	
	Finally, Esquirol is aware of great epistemic tensions.  He notices the discordance between categorical and dimensional diagnostic concepts, a distinction which was central to the DSM-III nosological revolution in 1980 and which animates many of the DSM-5 controversies today. Furthermore, Esquirol reveals the inner conflict he feels between honoring the received wisdom of the past and embracing the empirical science of the present:
Does the moon exercise any influence upon the insane?  ...The English, and almost all the moderns, give to the insane the name of lunatics... Certain isolated facts and phenomena observed in many nervous diseases would seem to justify this opinion.  I have been unable to verify this influence, though I have been at some pains to assure myself of it...  At Hospital Salpêtrière, where practical truths have become, in some sort known, among the inmates of the house, they have no longer any suspicions of lunar influence.  The same is true of the Bicêtre...  Nevertheless, an opinion which has existed for ages, which is spread abroad through all lands, and which is consecrated by finding a place in the vocabulary of every tongue, demands the most careful attention of observers. (pp. 32-33, my emphasis)
This hardly seems like the writing of a revolutionary, though that he was.  
Inventional Visual Rhetoric
      Alongside a description of the characteristic symptoms and their observed course, Esquirol provided an illustrative case history for each diagnostic category in his textbook.  Each of these histories includes a description of how the patients typically appear physically, including such features as posture and skin color, and a hand-drawn image of a patient exemplifying the physical ‘look’ associated with the diagnosis (Figure 3.4).  

Source: Illustrations in Esquirol's textbook, Mental Maladies. From top left, clockwise: a sadness-maniac ('lypemaniac'), a 'maniac,' an 'idiot,' and a 'demented lunatic' (Esquirol, 1838a, pp. 1.411, 2.162, 2.230, & 2.316).
      These images were drawn in a style reminiscent of Linnaeus' (1735) renderings of plant species a century earlier (Gilman, 1982).76  Linnaeus's classificatory illustrations have stood in for the specificity of modern medicine in terms of both diagnosis and treatment, in contrast to the holistic nature of the humoral model.  An illuminating example of this is found in an advertisement (Figure 3.5) in the American Journal of Psychiatry, which compares the specificity of bee communication, as represented by Linnaeus, to the specificity of the minor tranquilizer 'Librium' (Roche, 1981, pp. A36–A37).
      
Source: An advertisement in the American Journal of Psychiatry (Roche, 1981, pp. A36–A37).
      Influenced by Pinel, Esquirol considered physical features to be very important in classifying ‘specimens’ of madness, a physiognomic epistemic orientation shared with the phrenologists.  This grounded psychopathology in physical biology, helping to anchor primitive psychiatry in the larger institutional domain of medicine.  Subsequent alienists of the nineteenth century continued to regard patients' physical appearance as diagnostically relevant, to the extent that “the visual image was central to the clinical practice of individuating the pathology” (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 193).  
      Kenneth Burke provides a hint about the underlying rhetorical motives when he suggests that a preoccupation with images can be associated with a “mystical transcendence of the person in generalizing the concept of role to the point where the realistic or dramatistic notion of people in situations retreats behind the pure lyric of imagistic suggestion” (1969a, p. 300).  Certainly, the visual always lies within a web of signification (Geertz, 1973).  Images also seem especially well-suited to be significant symbols upon which a new, transcendent, ultimate order can be constructed.  A new organizing object is introduced within a visual epistemic field which has not yet been reduced to either continuous or discontinuous terms.  Its visibility, accessible to all, announces the possible formation of a new epistemic paradigm.  
      Along these lines, I contend that the prominent inclusion of images within the nosological text implies a dissatisfaction with a purely symbolic level of signification, which Esquirol felt the need to supplement with illustrations that are at once iconic, in that they are meant to resemble or imitate the signified, and indexical, in that there is supposedly an actual relationship between psychopathology and posture, facial expression, complexion, and other similar physical attributes (Peirce, 1868).  Each of these levels of signification should be understood in light of the rhetorical canon of elocutio, by which Esquirol ornamented his new epistemic objects.  During the nineteenth century, the teaching of rhetoric became scientized, leading to the “elocutionary sciences of chironomia (descriptive gesturing), chirologia (emotional gesturing), proxemics (body positioning), facial display, and bodily action” (Gronbeck, 2008, p. xxiv).  In Esquirol we have a fascinating example of symmetry whereby the teaching of science becomes rhetoricized along precisely the same lines: His illustrations emphasize “appearance, complexion… posture, gestures, and movements of the entire figure” (Gilman, 1982, p. 12).  The strategy of elaborating a scientific concept by means of visual copia is a common way to enhance a concept's sense of reality (Burri & Dumit, 2008).  Publication of Esquirol's images historicized the new clinical gaze and the distinctive form in which psychopathology, in all its varieties, appears to this gaze.
      Humoral pathology also featured a strong visual component.  Its therapies were, more often than not, worse than useless, but they were persuasive nevertheless.  Bleeding a feverish patient produced an immediate change in complexion and body temperature that all could see and feel.  This may not have corresponded with a cure, but it did not need to.  No one can see a cure itself; it is always mysterious and hidden (just as causation was accessible only intuitively, as Hume argued).  The patient either gets better or dies, and if either includes a visual change, our compulsively reasonable (but often irrational) minds cannot help assigning meaning to the imagined association between the two.  The visual evidence that we have at least some mastery over the natural world appeals to our gnostic desire for some secret, ineffable knowledge by which we can be saved from the imperfection, flaws, dangers, and evil embedded in the material world of disease and death.  Our cognitive biases belie a fantasy of mastery over an uncontrollable situation.  This is how the ‘functional neurological’ hypothesis of hysteria, which explains nothing at all (quite explicitly) but involves visible fMRI evidence, could become preferred over the conversion hypothesis, which provides a complete explanation and suggests an invisible, but often successful method of treatment.  An explanation that makes sense but is invisible generally will be suspect.  Explanations can be wrong, especially those built on the premise that our unconscious minds play tricks on us, intentionally deceiving us in order to avoid staring into the abyss of our neuroses, preferring even bodily suffering over confronting an inner conflict.
      Much like the cultural return of the humoral ultimate order in the marketing of alternative medicine, visual displays of madness have made a great return in the neurobiological discourses of psychopathology.  For example, psychiatrist Daniel Amen runs a clinic that specializes in single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) imaging techniques, with which he claims he can classify subtypes of mental disorders that are not currently recognized by mainstream psychiatry.  Amen also claims that such images can aid differential diagnosis between accepted disorder categories, as well as inform medication decisions and monitor treatment outcomes.  The website presents sample SPECT images for a variety of disorders, accompanied by explanatory captions and adjoining case histories (Figures 3.6 and 3.7).  Much like Esquirol’s illustrations, captions tell the reader what is supposedly evident in the image, though perhaps ‘Ce n'est pas une maladie mentale’ would be better (Magritte, 1929; Figure 3.8).




Source: (The Amen Clinics, 2012c, sec. SCHIZOPHRENIA).

Given the case history, it is unclear (and left unexplained) how the image contributed to either the diagnosis or the treatment plan  (The Amen Clinics, 2013, sec. Anger/Severe ODD).



	In his gallery of SPECT images, Amen sees what Esquirol saw in his asylum: specific patterns, diversity in what once was thought to be a unity, and a corresponding new means of classification.  Accompanying each of his images are descriptions of the essential features of the putative diagnostic category and the typical features one will ‘see’ in the SPECT images.  Yet, ambiguity pervades the pseudo-precision of this neo-phrenological exercise. For example, in ‘Temporal lobe ADD,’ “SPECT imaging typically shows decreased or increased activity in the temporal lobes with decreased prefrontal cortex activity” (The Amen Clinics, 2012b, sec. Temporal Lobe ADD, my emphasis).  The ‘insights’ provided by the images are not always very insightful; for example, SPECT imaging helped to diagnose a child presenting with “angry outbursts and constant defiant behavior” with oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), and helped select a medication that was of a different class than the five drugs that had already been tried unsuccessfully (The Amen Clinics, 2013, sec. Anger/Severe ODD).
      The website of the Amen Clinics revealingly suggests that “SPECT can specifically help people with ADHD by: Helping evaluate whether or not the person is ADHD; Helping determine the type of ADHD to inform treatment decisions; …Reducing emotional pain and stigma by demonstrating that symptoms and behaviors are not imaginary; Increasing treatment compliance by showing pictures of results; Helping families gain a better understanding of the illness through visuals” (The Amen Clinics, 2012a, sec. SPECT IMAGING, my emphasis).  Not only is the imaging technology said to increase diagnostic precision, it can do so while reducing stigma, increasing compliance, and facilitating public understanding.
Neurosis and Psychosis
      Just as physicians during the nineteenth century began charting the developments and changes of symptoms in the presentation of an illness over time, critics can study the longitudinal course of terminologies of mental illness.  The terminologies at any given point during this period for the most part stress discontinuity; similarly, these terminologies enact discontinuity in their changes, interactions, and moments of self-reference.  The terms ‘neurosis’ and ‘psychosis’ emerged in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (respectively), but the relatively constant flux in meaning through the early twentieth century makes it very difficult to read psychiatric discourses from this period on their own terms.  
      At first, ‘neurosis’ designated any disease of the nervous system, while ‘psychosis’ initially referred to the psychic dimension of a brain disease and entailed a total disorder of the personality coupled with an organic brain pathology (Janzarik, 2003; Knoff, 1970; Schmidt-Degenhard, 1988).  Neither Pinel nor Esquirol used the term neurosis, as neuroses were within the general domain of the physician and distinct from insanity (and, for Esquirol, partial insanity).  When the concept of neurosis first appeared in the late eighteenth century, it signified a lesion of the nerves, in accordance with the anatomical model of pathology.  In contrast to ‘neuritis,’ in which one could see visibly damaged nerves upon autopsy, the neurological damage associated with neurosis was invisible but presumed, and the prevailing belief was that “in due course scientific advances would locate the invisible pathology” (Healy, 1997, p. 39).  Epilepsy (explicitly defined as a neurosis in the late nineteenth century) and neuropathy are diseases that capture the original meaning of the term.  Perhaps ironically, the best modern example of a psychiatric disorder believed to be an invisible neurological disorder is ‘functional neurological disorder.’  The DSM-5 conversion of hysteria into functional neurological disorder brings psychiatry full circle, reintroducing the original concept of neurosis for the historically important hysterical condition (although the somatoform disorder work group would undoubtedly be horrified by the suggestion that they reintroduced the concept of neurosis).  
      Karl Friedrich Canstatt introduced the concept of psychosis in 1841 as a synonym for ‘psychic neurosis’ (Bürgy, 2008; Canstatt, 1841; Scharfetter, 1987).77  Feuchtersleben (1845) stressed the importance of both the somatic and the psychic in understanding psychosis, and deployed the term as a subset of the larger category of neurosis:
Every psychosis is, at the same time, a neurosis; because, without the intervention of nervous action, no change of the psychical action becomes manifest, but every neurosis is not a psychosis, of which convulsions and pain afford sufficient examples.  Agreeably to this notion is the popular view that a madman is not called mad because his brain is over-excited, but because he judges and acts absurdly. (Feuchtersleben, 1847, p. 246)
During the second half of the nineteenth century, ‘psychosis’ frequently appeared in the psychiatric literature, generally used as a “synonym for terms such as mental disorder, mental illness, and insanity” (Bürgy, 2008, p. 1201).  While efforts, following the discovery of the reflex arc, to locate increasingly higher nervous system functions in the brain enjoyed much success, belief lingered that non-material sources of the highest functions associated with conscious judgment would be discovered.  The emerging distinction between ‘psychosis’ and ‘neurosis’ reflects this belief in that the former was a disorder of the mind while the latter was a disorder of the nervous system (Beer, 1995, 1996).  Of course, every disorder of the central nervous system implicates the mind in some manner, and vice versa.  Classification of a disorder as one or the other unavoidably introduces assumptions about etiology, implying the causal priority of either mind or brain.  These distinctions became more pronounced once the concept of neurosis narrowed, resulting in a discursive decoupling of the two into distinct, mutually exclusive categories.  
	Freud (1893b, 1924a) reintroduced this same distinction within the concept of neurosis itself, distinguishing ‘psychoneuroses’ (later, just ‘neuroses’ unqualified) that were psychological in nature from ‘actual neuroses’ that entailed physical damage to the nerves.  Freud suggested that the most common cause of this damage was masturbation, which Esquirol (1838b) referred to as “that scourge of human kind” (p. 41).  With respect to therapeutic outcomes, risk management, and preventive psychiatry, Freud (1893b) viewed 'actual neurosis' very much as psychosis is understood today, and regarded it as psychoanalytically untreatable.  Freud’s understanding of ‘neurosis’ (qua ‘psychoneurosis,’ not ‘actual neurosis’) radically transforms what was once a “rigid boundary” between the sane and the insane by “creating a new class of neurotic behaviors and linking it with normal rather than psychotic behavior” (Horowitz, 2002, p. 53).  Freudian neuroses imply a fluid and dynamic nosology in which the difference between normality and neurosis is a matter of degree, not kind.  Rather than the discontinuous categories of healthy and diseased, we have a continuous spectrum arrayed dimensionally.  This nosological view came to dominate the psychodynamic tradition in much of the twentieth century, although, as discussed in Chapter 1, it fell out of favor in mainstream psychiatry with the 1980 publication of DSM-III.  In Chapter 4, we will see how this repressed perspective has returned in contemporary psychiatric discourse about the nature, treatment, and prevention of psychotic disorders.
	The cyclic alternation of the meaning of ‘neurosis’ (actual or otherwise) and ‘psychosis’ created some confusion: everyone meant something definite by each term, but these meanings often were idiosyncratic, not shared.  Since Freud believed that only the (psycho-)neuroses could be treated effectively with psychoanalysis, the term came to be associated with the psychoanalytic tradition and its dimensional nosologies.  Psychosis was something more extreme, left to the asylum psychiatrists who treated large confined groups of mentally ill patients rather than spending six hours per week with individual patients, as Freud did (Freud, 1913a).  In part because of this division, neuroses became associated with disordered psychological functioning, and psychoses with gross nervous system dysfunction.  Pierre Janet (1920) identified a loss of la fonction du réel (‘the reality function’) as the defining characteristic of neurosis; similarly, Freud suggested that neurotic patients “turn away from reality because they find it unbearable—either the whole or parts of it” (Freud, 1911, p. 301). Though both neurosis and psychosis were associated with impaired reality testing, in psychosis this impairment was absolute (Kantrowitz, Katz, Paolitto, Sashin, & Solomon, 1987).  Freud, for whom acute florid hallucination “is perhaps the most extreme and striking form of psychosis,” conceptualized psychosis as a state in which “either the external world is not perceived at all, or the perception of it has no effect” (Freud, 1924a, p. 151).  In contrast, the loss of insight was milder in a neurotic break with reality, although it could progress to psychosis, suggesting more of a continuum than a strict etiological and pathogenic division:
[At] a final stage in the evolution of a neuroses [sic], the feeling of unreality may pass over into that falsification of reality which we label delusion.  Hypochondriacal fear, such as the common one of heart disease, may evolve by quantitative increase into the feeling that the heart is literally gone, or actually broken.  In this case, fear and anxiety have developed into delusion.  Another example may be cited; in groping for the cause of his illness, a sufferer may conclude that he is sick because he has violated the rules, as he understands them, of health.  Later on, as he becomes hopeless concerning his recovery, he may deny that he is ill and state that his sins have found him out or even that he is being punished by God.  (Myerson, 1936, p. 263)  
Clearly, the psychotic patient suffers from a total disconnection from reality, with a complete lack of insight.  At the end of the nineteenth century, this break with reality became associated with a new diagnostic category, the emergence of which coincided with a nosological development that serves as the foundation for the modern (DSM-III) approach to the classification of mental illness.
Dementia Praecox: Prognosis as Diagnosis
      Unlike the forms of mental illness known in some manner since antiquity (e.g., melancholia), dementia praecox did not become an object of knowledge until the mid-nineteenth century, when alienists began noticing among the masses of generally insane patients a group of predominately young people who suffered from a chronic, progressive decline in mental faculties with no apparent cause.  Emil Kraepelin provided the first systematic treatment of dementia praecox, literally precocious or premature dementia, the precursor to what is now called ‘schizophrenia’ (Kraepelin, 1896).  Kraepelin appropriated the basic idea for dementia praecox from Bénédict-Augustin Morel, who in 1852 described (in passing) a disorder he called ‘démence précoce’ occurring in young patients who were ‘stuporous,’ appearing at first to have a good prognosis but nevertheless descending inevitably into incurable dementia (Morel, 1852).  Thomas Clouston named a similar disorder the “hereditary insanity of adolescence,” which he later shortened to “adolescent insanity,” not to be confused with (for Clouston) the closely related “masturbational insanity,” a diagnosis he continued to champion well after it fell out of vogue (Clark, 2004; Clouston, 1891, p. 111).  Based on work by his student, Ewald Hecker, Karl Kahlbaum described a form of ‘jugendliche irresein’ (juvenile madness) that often developed into catatonia, a syndrome he studied extensively, as well as hebephrenia, a syndrome characterized by severely disorganized speech and behavior (Hecker, 1871; Kahlbaum, 1863).  
      Kraepelin integrated these varied clinical pictures and their seemingly unrelated categories of symptoms (e.g., catatonia, confusion, delusions, disorganized behavior, grandiosity, hallucinations, impaired communication ranging from strange to completely incoherent, unusual thought patterns, etc.) into the unified nosological entity dementia praecox. The common organizing feature of dementia praecox was a marked deterioration in personal/social behavioral and cognitive functioning from which the patient was unlikely to recover.  Kraepelin accounted for the diverse phenotypes of disease expression by positing nine distinct ‘clinical forms’ of his new disease entity: “We meet everywhere the same fundamental disorders in the different forms of dementia praecox… in very varied conjunctions, even though the clinical picture may appear at first sight ever so divergent” (cited by Jablensky, 2011, pp. 3–4).78
      In the foreword to the fifth edition of his revolutionary textbook, Lehrbuch der Psychiatrie, Kraepelin emphasized the importance of the course of disease progression over time to his new conception of psychiatric disease: “What convinced me of the superiority of the clinical method of diagnosis… over the traditional one, was the certainty with which we could predict, on the basis of our new concept of disease, the future course of events” (cited by Noll, 2011, p. 66).  In the case of dementia praecox, the “importance of our diagnosis would therefore consist in this: that we are now able, at the very beginning of the illness, to predict its resulting in a characteristic state of feebleness” (Kraepelin, 1917, pp. 28–29).  The sixth edition culminated in a major insight that would define his nosological system: There are ultimately two categories of insanity, one that terminates in dementia (dementia praecox was the classic exemplar of this category) and one that does not (exemplified by manic-depressive insanity, based on the concept in French alienism of folie circulaire, or ‘circular insanity’).  The ability to observe the course of the illness, made systematically possible scarcely fifty years earlier, became central to the organization of Kraepelin’s nosology, later serving as the ideological basis for DSM-III.  Just as the ‘neo-Kraepelinian’ categorical DSM-III is now giving way to the more dimensional DSM-5, Kraepelin, toward the end of his life, discussed the possibility of replacing his dichotomous categorical nosology with a dimensional model in which the syndromes associated with his two categories of insanity “do not represent the expression of particular pathological processes, but rather indicate the areas of our personality in which these processes unfold” (Kraepelin, 1974, p. 12).
      Kraepelin’s approach was revolutionary for several reasons.  First, he replaced the Sydenhamian ‘syndrome’ (i.e., “a cluster of signs and symptoms that would remain consistent regardless of outcome”) with ‘prognosis’ as the key term under which disease entities were organized (Noll, 2011, p. 66).79  This move made it possible, years later, for the term ‘syndrome’ to be transformed such that the idea of a ‘risk syndrome’ was intelligible.  Second, his methodology involved statistical analysis of longitudinal data generated from thousands of cases, setting the stage for the biopolitical turn in the twentieth century.  Third, he explicitly appropriated the clinical language of medicine to fashion psychiatry as its own medical specialty that treated naturally-occurring (provisional) discrete disease entities, each of which was understood to have an underlying (but as of yet unknown) biological aetiology and pathophysiology.  Appeals to imagery no longer were needed to serve this institutional linking function.  For dementia praecox, the “nature of the disease process… is not known, but it seems probable, judging from the clinical course, and especially in those cases where there has been a rapid deterioration, that there is a definite disease process in the brain, involving the cortical neurones”: indeed in a few cases, “anatomical lesions have been found which can be explained only upon such a basis” (Kraepelin, 1907, p. 221).  This finding confirmed suspicions that Kraepelin had voiced a decade earlier:
The real nature of dementia praecox is totally obscure… It is hard to see why an organism which has hitherto developed in a healthy or even energetic way should suddenly, and for no particular reason, not only come to a standstill but even deteriorate into chronic sickness… I consider it more likely that what we have here is a tangible morbid process occurring in the brain… It is true that morbid anatomy has so far been quite unable to help us here, but we should not forget that reliable methods have not yet been employed in a serious search for morbid changes. (Kraepelin, 1987, p. 23)
Kraepelin already had found evidence that such lesions constituted the organic basis of what we now know as Alzheimer’s disease.  As dementia praecox was for Kraepelin essentially an early-onset variant of the same disorder (as they both develop the same putatively terminal course), he assumed it was only a matter of time before the parallel organic brain pathology would be mapped out for dementia praecox (Metzl, 2009).  
      One important caveat must be noted here.  That mental diseases have a biological basis does not imply that that their causes can be reduced entirely to physical defects of the brain; Kraepelin dismissed attempts to do so as brain mythology (‘hirnmythologie’).80  Nor does it imply the irrelevance of psychological factors: the appendix to Kraepelin’s lectures on clinical psychiatry asserts that this field “must include a study of the personality itself, the temperament and general reactions, and also an analysis of the aspirations, wishes, and conflicts, which have preceded the outbreak of definite mental disorder, and in a great measure determine its occurrence” (T. Johnstone, 1917, p. 357).81  Kraepelin believed it was important to chart all observed clinical variants carefully, but he fiercely resisted ascribing etiological significance to their division, and left open the question whether these clinical variants manifested an underlying unitary pathogenesis or, instead, represented multiple disease states (Jablensky, 2010).  Still, Kraepelin believed that the evidence justified provisionally “regarding the majority at least of the clinical pictures which are brought together here as the expression of a single morbid process, though outwardly they often diverge very far from on another” (Kraepelin, 1919, p. 3).  Unfortunately, Kraepelin’s hopes of finding distinctive organic antecedents and neurobiological pathological mechanisms associated with behavioral clusters never were realized (Boyle, 1990; Gottesman & Shields, 1982; Jaspers, 1963; Kendell, 1975; Wing, 1978).
	Like Esquirol, Kraepelin had identified a new way of looking at mental illness, although unlike Esquirol, visual observation did not figure heavily in this new technology of seeing.  Kraepelin and Freud both
mark a move away from the eye. Each opens the interior of the patient to medical knowledge by demoting observation in favor of interpretation.  Kraepelin… illustrated his textbook liberally with illustrations, but they were just that—illustrations.  Their diagnostic role had been taken over by the case history: the chronology of symptomatology, etiology, and prognosis that was the diagnostic key. (N. S. Rose, 2007, pp. 193–194)
Just as Kraepelin rejects Esquirol’s prioritization of visual observation, Freud disparages his teacher, Jean-Martin Charcot, as “not a reflective man, not a thinker: he had the nature of an artist—he was, as he himself said, a ‘visuel,’—a man who sees” (Freud, 1893a, p. 49).  What Kraepelin (and Freud) made visible was subtle, easy to miss – indeed, the “whole disturbance [associated with dementia praecox] can be so very gradual and the symptoms so ill-defined that relatives see them only as the result of an unfortunate development or perhaps a weakness in character” (Kraepelin, 1987, p. 13).  Further, the clinical pictures82 of the different forms of dementia praecox were so variegated that Kraepelin went on for some seventy pages outlining the various psychic symptoms he had observed.  Yet these symptoms could be divided into two broad groups to form the “general psychic clinical picture” of dementia praecox (Kraepelin, 1919, p. 74).  The first roughly corresponds with what we now consider ‘negative symptoms,’ primarily flat affect, alogia, avolition, and anhedonia:
One the one hand, we observe a weakening of those emotional activities which permanently form the mainsprings of volition.  In connection with this, mental activity and instinct for occupation become mute.  The result of this part of the morbid process is emotional dullness, failure of mental activities, loss of mastery over volition, of endeavor, and of ability for independent action.  The essence of personality is thereby destroyed, the best and most precious part of its being, as [German asylum reformer, neurologist, and psychiatrist Wilhelm] Griesinger once expressed it, torn from her… The rapidity with which deep-seated and permanent dementia sometimes develops in the domain of intellectual work makes the suggestion easy, that it also may itself be drawn by the disease into a sympathetic morbid state, even though it is invariably encroached on to a much less degree than emotion and volition. (Kraepelin, 1919, p. 74, emphasis in original)
One cannot fail to notice here the tripartite division of the psyche—intellect, affect, and will—inherited from the faculty psychology tradition of the Scottish Enlightenment.  
      Kraepelin’s second group includes much of what we now call ‘positive symptoms,’ which include delusions, hallucinations, ideas of reference, grandiose thinking, disorganized speech, bizarre thoughts, and bizarre psychomotor behavior (e.g., catatonia).  Rather than focus on the signs and symptoms here, Kraepelin describes what he sees as their underlying psychic basis:
The second group of disorders... gives dementia praecox its peculiar stamp… It consists of the loss of the inner unity of the activities of intellect, emotion, and volition in themselves and among one another... This annihilation presents itself to us in the disorders of association… in incoherence of the train of thought, in the sharp changes of moods as well as in desultoriness and derailments in practical work.  But further the near connection between thinking and feeling, between deliberation and emotional activity on the one hand, and practical work on the other is more or less lost.  Emotions do not correspond to ideas. The patients laugh and weep without cause, without any relation to their circumstances and their experiences, smile while they narrate the tale of their attempts at suicide: they are very much pleased that they “chatter so foolishly,” and must remain permanently in the institution, on the most insignificant occasions they fail into violent terror or outbursts of rage, and then immediately break out into a neighing laugh.  It is just this disagreement between idea and emotion that gives their behavior the stamp of “silliness.” (Kraepelin, 1919, pp. 74–75, emphasis in original)
Kraepelin was following an idea developed by Erwin Stransky, a Viennese neurologist who devised an explanatory model of dementia praecox involving “inaffectivity” due to the loss of “intrapsychical coordination,” i.e., loosening of the connection between the “noopsyche” and the “thymopsyche” (Kretzschmar & Petit, 1994, p. 377).83  Kraepelin believed further in a connection between negative and positive symptoms:
As it seems to me, there exists an inner connection between the two groups of disorders, which are here distinguished. What fashions our experiences into a firmly mortised building, in which each part must fit the other and subordinate itself to the general plan, are general conceptions and ideas. The even calm of our temper, the swift victory over sudden shocks, are guaranteed by the higher general emotions; on the one hand they give to the background of our mood a definite coloring even when no emotional stimuli are caused by special internal or external experiences. Lastly, the inner unity of our will is conditioned by the general trend of volition which is always alive in us, and which is the product of our racial and personal development. We may therefore expect that a weakening or annihilation of the influence which general conceptions, higher emotions, and the permanent general trend of volition exercise on our thinking, feeling, and acting, must draw after it that inner disintegration, those “schizophrenic” disorders, which we meet with in dementia praecox. It seems to me that the disorders observed in the patients and the complaints to which they give utterance, point exactly to injury to the general scheme of our psychic development, as it fixes the substance of our personality. The general trend of volition and also the higher emotions might form the first point of attack. But further the instrument of general conceptions with its regulating influence on the train of thought would then also become worthless, if the will were no longer capable of using it.  (Kraepelin, 1919, pp. 75–76, emphasis in original)
Here, we see the influence of Kantian psychology (according to which concepts and sense perception are inseparably connected through intuition) on Kraepelin’s understanding of the psychopathology of dementia praecox (Sedler, 1994).
Schizophrenia: A Continuum of Discontinuity
	Dementia praecox underwent one more important transformation under Paul Eugen Bleuler, who conceptualized the disorder as a ‘loosening of associations,’ leading him to propose the name ‘schizophrenia’ (to which Kraepelin refers in the passage quoted above).  A decade after the publication of Kraepelin’s classic text, Bleuler criticized the concept of dementia praecox as antiquated and untimely:
The older term is a product of a time when not only the very concept of dementia, but, also that of precocity, was applicable to all cases at hand.  But it hardly fits our contemporary ideas of the scope of this disease-entity. (Bleuler, 1911a, p. 7)  
Scarcely a century earlier, 2,500-year-old terms were still current; by the beginning of the twentieth century, terms scarcely a single decade old were seen as ancient and out of touch, historical artifacts from a bygone era.  Just as psychiatry became attuned to the continuous course of disease over time, its disease-concepts seemed to follow a rather discontinuous temporal course, a diachronic loosening of nosological associations.  The discontinuous nature of the knowledge-production process became reflected in the knowledge produced, and dementia praecox became schizophrenia.  This term combined the Greek words for ‘to split’ (schizein, ???????) and ‘mind’ (phr?n, ????), because, while it is not “possible to find a perfect name for a concept which is still developing and changing… the ‘splitting’ of different psychic functions is one of its most important characteristics” (p. 8).  In light of schizophrenia’s role in establishing a psychiatric nosology in which insanity has been divided into discrete disease entities, featuring a splitting mind, which, like insanity, once had been regarded as unitary, seems fitting.  
      Historians of medicine usually attribute the notion that schizophrenia is irreversible to Kraepelin, often as a way to distinguish him from Bleuler, but this is backwards.84  In typically careful, measured scientific prose, Kraepelin notes: “[The] possibility cannot in the present state of our knowledge be disputed, that a certain number of cases of dementia praecox attain to complete and permanent recovery, and also the relations to the period of youth do not appear without exception” (Kraepelin, 1919, p. 4).  For Bleuler, however, a patient's seemingly permanent recovery is almost certainly illusory:
[Whenever] I have been able to examine any of those who have been pronounced cured I have found a residue of the illness.  The diagnosis of a cure has often been rash… I know patients whose achievements in life have been outstanding… [including] business men who independently build up large and successful businesses, civil servants, parsons, a poet and a scholar of international renown.  The last of these had suffered two attacks of catatonia before writing a new scientific work.  It was a pleasure to discuss scientific matters with him even when he was still suffering from genuine delusional ideas.  But when I finally considered him completely ready to resume work, he was still making crude logical mistakes when one spoke to him about the complexes which had played a part in his illness.  I would not like to accept as a genuine cure a state in which some parts of the mental apparatus are permanently inaccessible to logic… When the disease process flares up, it is more correct, in my view, to talk in terms of deteriorating attacks, rather than its recurrence.  Of course the term recurrence is more comforting to the patient and his relatives than the notion of progressively deteriorating attacks. (Bleuler, 1987, pp. 61–62)
In this passage we glimpse the totalizing character of Bleuler’s schizophrenia, and the strict criteria with which he evaluates a patient's sanity.  Were a cure effected, the patient no longer make ‘crude logical mistakes’ relating to some past traumatic event or subject of disordered reasoning.  Bleuler is able to take pleasure in discussing state-of-the-art science with a scholar whom he judges to be acutely psychotic.  The final insight, that patients are troubled by the likelihood (in his opinion) that deterioration is inevitable, raises the additional question whether to prioritize epistemic or therapeutic values, particularly if providing hope and comfort to a mentally ill patient improves treatment outcomes (Anthony, 1993; Kleinman, Eisenberg, & Good, 1978; Slade, 2010).  Kraepelin is agnostic regarding recovery.  Bleuler, however, explicitly excludes the possibility: “By the term ‘dementia praecox’ or ‘schizophrenia’ we designate a group of psychoses whose course is at times chronic, at times marked by intermittent attacks, and which can stop or retrograde at any stage but does not permit a full restitutio ad integrum” (Bleuler, 1911a, p. 9).  
	Further, despite a clear nominal discontinuity between ‘schizophrenia’ and ‘dementia praecox,’ Bleuler stresses that they are different labels for the same fundamental disease entity:
In using the term dementia praecox I would like it to mean what the creator of the concept meant it to mean.  To treat the subject from any other point of view would serve no purpose, but I would like to emphasize that Kraepelin’s dementia praecox is not necessarily either a form of dementia or a disorder of early onset.  For this reason, and because there is no adjective or noun that can be derived from the term dementia praecox, I am taking the liberty of using the word schizophrenia to denote Kraepelin’s concept.  I believe that the tearing apart or splitting of psychic functions is a prominent symptom of the whole group and I will give my reasons elsewhere. (Bleuler, 1987, p. 59, emphasis in the original)
In other words: I am using the concept in the same way as Kraepelin did, meaning what he meant, except that he got it entirely wrong and, even worse, his neologism is not very catchy, so I have given it a new name and supplied a new meaning.  Of course, to some extent this is simply the inevitable consequence of making sense of a text (for certainly a nosological category and its accompanying diagnostic criteria constitute a text imbued with a surplus of meaning ripe for interpretation) by putting it in other words; as biblical scholar Bart Ehrman has observed, “to read a text is, necessarily, to change a text” (2005, p. 217).  Given Kraepelin’s emphasis on prognosis, it is interesting that the title of Bleuler’s article is ‘Die prognose der dementia praecox: Schizophreniegruppe’ (‘The prognosis of dementia praecox: Group of schizophrenias’): this suggests that the concept of schizophrenia developed over time just as the course of schizophrenia develops in an individual case over time.  Further, Bleuler uses the plural ‘schizophrenias’ because he does not view schizophrenia “as a disease in the narrower sense but as a disease group, about analogous with the group of the organic dementias, which are divided into paresis, senile forms, etc.  One should, therefore, really speak of schizophrenias in the plural” (Bleuler, 1924, p. 373).  This move, justified on the grounds that it facilitated newly possible ‘studies of heredity,’ presaged the later notion of schizophrenia spectrum disorders (e.g., delusional disorder, psychotic depression, schizotypal personality disorder, schizophreniform disorder, schizoaffective disorder, and importantly for the next chapter, psychosis risk syndrome).
      Today, schizophrenia often misleadingly suggests something akin to ‘multiple personality disorder’ to a lay audience (interpreting ‘split-mind’ to mean a psyche divided between more than one personality, rather than psychic functions undergoing a process of splitting).85  In Bleuler’s time, however, the name ‘schizophrenia’ hit the right cord as a psychiatric ideograph (McGee, 1980), containing a powerful combination of precision and ambiguity:
The term schizophrenia and the idea of a loosening of associations caught on in part because people thought they knew what was meant by a loosening of associations but also in part because an adjective could be made of the term in a way that it couldn’t be made of dementia praecox.  Once coined, words like schizophrenia, neurosis, and psychosis can be like harpoons; if they go in they can be very difficult to get out.  On such details can important aspects of the history of medicine turn. (Healy, 1997, p. 35)
Something about the concept of loosening associations was easy for people to see in others.  Helpfully, Bleuler also incorporated the “imagery and vocabulary of syphilology… [by writing about] ‘severe cases’ requiring confinement, and ‘latent cases’ lurking about without the patient realizing that he is ill” (Szasz, 1976, p. 11).  Like other mental disorders of its day, as a ‘disease’ schizophrenia was a working hypothesis that may not meet the criteria of a unified etiology or pathogenesis. The transformation of dementia praecox into schizophrenia, however, entailed a subtle but very important change: No longer fixed as a Kraepelinian provisional natural disease entity, one could conceive of schizophrenia, like the various ‘clinical forms’ from which it was constructed, as a clustering of signs and symptoms—that is, as a syndrome (J. N. Morris, 1978).  
	Conceptually, Bleuler’s schizophrenia extended Kraepelin’s dementia praecox fairly faithfully, while simultaneously integrating several important psychoanalytic ideas about the nature of the illness.  Three years after it was published, Swiss psychiatrist and founder of analytic psychology, Carl Jung, praised Bleuler's formulation as similar to his own:
It is particularly gratifying to me that a psychiatrist of Bleuler’s standing has fully accepted, in his great monograph on the disease, all the essential points in my work.  The chief difference between us is as to whether the psychological disturbance should be regarded as primary or secondary in relation to the physiological basis. (Jung, 1960b, p. 155)
Furthermore, Bleuler invokes concepts popularized by Pierre Janet (who, like Freud, trained under Charcot at Salpêtrière) in order to explain the process of psychic splitting (‘spaltung’):
In every case, we are confronted with a more or less clear-cut splitting of the psychic functions.  If the disease is marked, the personality loses its unity; at different times different psychic complexes seem to represent the personality… one set of complexes dominates the personality for a time, while other groups of ideas or drives are ‘split off’ and seem either partly or completely impotent… It is the splitting which gives the peculiar stamp to the entire symptomatology.  However, behind this systematic splitting into definite idea-complexes, we have found a previous primary loosening of the associational structure which can lead to an irregular fragmentation of such solidly established elements as concrete ideas.  The term, schizophrenia, refers to both kinds of splitting, which often fuse in their effects. (Bleuler, 1911a, pp. 9, 362)
Here, again, the discontinuous gives way to a conceptual continuity, as Bleuler (loosely?) associates the concept of 'complexes' with fragmented ideas, and integrates psychodynamic concepts into the Kraepelinian disease construct.  Bleuler appears to have been influenced by Janet’s concept of désagrégation (dissociation), a fragmentation of the psyche under sharp affective stress that results in a fixed idea complex (Ellenberger, 1970; Janet & Raymond, 1903). The term ‘complex,’ of course, is a throwback to a humoral rhetoric in which disorders of the personality proceed from an imbalanced complex of vital fluids; in modern times, it first appears in the work of Karl Kahlbaum’s student, Georg Theodor Ziehen, as ‘gefühlsbetonter vorstellungskomplex’ (‘emotionally-charged representational complex,’ roughly), and makes its way to Bleuler by way of Carl Jung in 1904 (Freud & Jung, 1974; Moskowitz & Heim, 2011).86  Though not introduced with a literal illustration, Jung metaphorically invokes the inventional power of the image in scientific discourse in his clearest exposition of the appropriated concept:
What then, scientifically speaking, is a “feeling-toned complex?”  It is the image of a certain psychic situation which is strongly accentuated emotionally and is, moreover, incompatible with the habitual attitude of consciousness.  This image has a powerful inner coherence, it has its own wholeness and, in addition, a relatively high degree of autonomy, that it is subject to the control of the conscious mind to only a limited extent, and therefore behaves like an animated foreign body in the sphere of consciousness… My findings in regard to complexes corroborate [a] somewhat disquieting picture of the possibilities of psychic disintegration, for fundamentally there is no difference in principle between a fragmentary personality and a complex.  They have all the essential features in common, until we come to the delicate question of fragmented consciousness.  Personality fragments undoubtedly have their own consciousness, but whether some psychic fragments as complexes are also capable of a consciousness of their own is a still unanswered question… We observe… in certain psychoses… [that] the complexes get “loud” and appear as “voices” having a thoroughly personal character.  Today we can take it as moderately certain that complexes are in fact “splinter psyches.” The aetiology of their origin is frequently a so-called trauma, an emotional shock or some such thing, that splits off a bit of the psyche.  Certainly one of the commonest causes is a moral conflict, which ultimately derives from the apparent impossibility of affirming the whole of one’s nature. (Jung, 1960b, pp. 96–98, emphasis in the original)
This explanation parallels Janet’s etiological account of the ‘subconscious fixed idea’ (Ellenberger, 1970; Van der Hart & Friedman, 1989; Van der Kolk, Brown, & Van der Hart, 1989; Van der Kolk & Van der Hart, 1989).  Bleuler’s suggestion that a “loosening of associational structure” is behind the “splitting into definite idea-complexes” further parallels Janet’s suggestion that a “weakening of the synthetic activity of the mind” is behind the mental weakness of psychasthenia (Bleuler, 1911a, p. 362; Janet, 1930; Janet & Raymond, 1903; Perry & Laurence, 1984, p. 33).87
Anti-Psychotics and History
	The categories of continuity and discontinuity, as we have seen, can be extended temporally.  So far in this chapter, I have presented an historical account of the development of psychosis.  But that account would be incomplete without considering how history appears within the rhetorical economy of psychiatry.  I therefore now turn to a brief discussion about the various temporal orientations that the pharmaceutical industry articulated through its marketing of phenothiazine antipsychotic drugs.  The industry has imagined and re-imagined the history of contemporary psychiatry, along with the temporal course of psychosis as an object of knowledge, in its efforts to deal with the contradictions of continuity and discontinuity in the late capitalist marketplace.
	As a self-referential epistemic field, scientific legitimation depends in part on temporal narratives.  While progress in science “is widely recognized as nonlinear,” and, moreover, only “in hindsight does the development [of knowledge] appear to have the coherence that creates a sense of a linear, inexorable path,” it is nevertheless the case that scientific discourses tend to presuppose a linear flow of time (National Research Council, 2006, p. 73).  The arrow of epistemic progress almost always points toward the future (R. Morris, 1985).  
	Time is an epistemic category with a social origin that arises from the rhythms of our social interactions and institutional practices (Durkheim, 2001; Nowotny, 1992; Sorokin & Merton, 1937).  The typical argument form of scientific rhetoric is temporal—one establishes a link to the past by summarizing the state of relevant knowledge prior to research, then explains how the findings update that state, and finally suggests the next steps future research might take (Fahnestock, 2004; C. R. Miller, 1992; Toulmin & Goodfield, 1965).  Furthermore, an epistemic logic that aims at elucidating causal relationships entails specific temporal commitments.  For these reasons, scientific authority and institutional legitimation are bound up in narratives that establish temporal ethos (Kisiel, 1997; Lenzo, 1995; Suchman, 1995). 	
	Specifically, I examine advertisements for these drugs published in medical journals, and I address two complementary but distinct temporal maneuvers guided by 'pharmaceutical reason' (Lakoff, 2005).  First, I present a series of advertisements by which the figure of the antipsychotic gets deployed as a framing device that positions psychiatric modernity as a radical rupture with the primitive past.  'Western psychiatry' made this sudden break with the discovery of the anti-psychotic properties of the phenothiazine drug chlorpromazine ('Thorazine').  Everything coming before this discovery was utterly 'primitive' and barbaric.  Messages reflecting this move metonymically use phenothiazine compounds, especially Thorazine, to represent scientific progress and the birth of pharmaceutical reason.  Kendall (2011) notes that what was identified here was the “beginnings of the new science of psychiatry... that married the chemists' laboratory with the psychiatric ward,” adding a cautionary note: “It is easy to miss an important fact here: this also marks the birth of a new industry” (p. 267).
	Second, I examine how those same drugs get positioned temporally three decades after their discovery, when other newer antipsychotics complicated attempts to appeal to the state-of-the-art.  The central claim is that the medications discovered in the 1950s by the 'pioneers' are timeless classics that difficult to improve upon.  The latter move is, for obvious reasons, less commonly found in pharmaceutical marketing copy today, but shows up in the discourses of psychiatrists.  Though these two moves are complementary, they are also in tension, as on one hand the emphasis is on the discontinuous nature of scientific progress and the temporal ruptures it produced, while on the other, progress seems to have stopped at the beginning of the new golden era of scientific psychiatry. As pharmaceutical reason is the “strategic logic... that links chemical intervention to diagnostic representation according to the norm of disease specificity,” these rhetorical embodiments of particular attitudes toward history recur in the context of nosological controversy (Lakoff, 2005, p. 176).
Phenothiazines as the Discontinuous New
	In a two-page advertisement for Thorazine (Figure 3.9), one of a series, the left-page caption, “Basic tools of Primitive psychiatry,” appears above photographs of two museum artifacts: a totem from Zaire, “used to 'drive out' an illness,” and a mask from Nigeria that “honors dead ancestors and enforces the law” (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1975a, pp. 406–407). The opposing caption reads: “Basic tool of Western psychiatry,” under which appears the name “Thorazine,” along with an abbreviated version of the prescribing information insert for physicians in small print.  

Source: Advertisement in Hospital & Community Psychiatry (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1975a, pp. 406–407).
	A similar advertisement (Figure 3.10), part of a different series, for another phenothiazine antipsychotic, trifluorperazine ('Stelazine'), features a photograph of a painted mask found in Mexico on the left page (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1975b, pp. 329–330).  On the opposing page, the slogan “Lift the Mask of Psychotic Withdrawal” appears above an abbreviated version of the prescribing information sheet for Stelazine in small print.  The effect is to emphasize the 'transcultural' nature of the illness treated by Stelazine, while playing on the dissonance between an image of a tribal mask and the pageantry of modern psychopharmacological science.  The advertisement also illustrates how pharmaceutical reason reconfigured the category of psychotherapeutic intervention: The audience is told that “psychotic withdrawal,” treatable with Stelazine, “can make [schizophrenic patients] inaccessible to therapy.”  In this way, administration of an antipsychotic is both a therapeutic technique and a “disciplinary technology” which works “on the body, in order to help produce the subject as a speaking being” (Lakoff, 2005, p. 84).

Source: Advertisement in Hospital & Community Psychiatry (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1975b, pp. 329–330).

	Another advertisement for Thorazine (Figure 3.11), printed sixteen years earlier, contains an image from a wood engraving depicting a “surprise bath,” supposedly “used in colonial times 'to restore the distracted to their senses'” (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1959, pp. 52–53).  A second illustration demonstrates how this 'treatment' worked: a lever is pulled, which results in a presumably mentally ill man falling through a trap door in the floor into a pool of water.  The advertisement explains: “Less than 200 years ago, the mentally ill were bled, purged, beaten, and sometimes nearly drowned in efforts to restore them to their senses.  The treatment of mental illness has progressed far beyond methods such as these.”  
	Thorazine is described as a “fundamental drug” and a kind of “chemotherapy” for mental illness.  It owes its significance to both its unparalleled therapeutic efficacy and its role in “the development of related drugs which offer the psychiatrist opportunities to help an even greater number of patients.” This drug that now restores one's senses had been used only a few years earlier as a general anesthetic, branded as 'Largactil,' reflecting “initial perceptions of its likely large range of action” (Healy, 1997, p. 181, emphasis in original). While in this advertisement, Thorazine is still a general treatment for “mental illness,” it is just a few years from being understood as a highly specific treatment for schizophrenia (or even more specifically as a treatment for “psychotic agitation,” as in Figure 3.9).

Source: Advertisement in Mental Hospitals (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1959, pp. 52–53).


	All three of these advertisements show how the pharmaceutical industry cultivated an attitude toward antipsychotic drugs, the discovery of which inaugurated an era profoundly discontinuous with psychiatry's archaic past.  Taking advantage of the emphasis in modern science on the linearity of time, these advertisements exemplify a strategy by which one emphasizes the novelty of some idea, technique, or product by dissociating it from its historical antecedents.88  This strategy is not without its hazards:
Because linear time is sequential and progressive, any ‘cracks’ in the dissociative strategy, i.e., any lingering continuities between past and present, may render current issues as outmoded as the history they echo.  That is, associations between past and present may cast the present as retrogressive as the past, rather than coloring the past as progressive as the present. (Lake, 1991, p. 128)
Fear of the consequences of insufficient temporal dissociation almost led the group of psychiatrists associated with 'neo-Kraepelinism' to reject that label:
We didn't like it for a long time.  I think we were afraid it would seem too old-fashioned an idea, even though we insisted that all our residents read Kraepelin's monographs and emphasized his work with the medical students.  But we were worried that the label didn't point in the right direction.  (Guze, 2000, p. 405, my emphasis)
Similarly, I read the drive to root out lingering psychodynamic diagnoses (e.g., conversion disorder) from the DSM in  light of this concern.  Their presence seems archaic, and since a neuropsychiatric analogue has yet to be discovered, the only option is to come up with new names.
	Pharmaceutical companies faced a similar problem as new medications accumulated.  In the 1950s and early 1960s, psychopharmacologists discovered an array of extraordinarily effective psychiatric medications.  By and large, the medications discovered since then have not exceeded their predecessors in efficacy (Healy, 1997, 2004b; Hyman, 2013; N. S. Rose, 2007; Taylor, 2013).  This is not a fact generally highlighted by the pharmaceutical industry, but it arose in the 1980s in the context of marketing some of the older drugs.
Phenothiazines as the Continuous Old
	Three decades after the discovery of the antipsychotic effects of chlorpromazine, with newer antipsychotics on the market, advertisements for the older drugs ceased emphasizing the importance of novelty.  Marketers rebranded the same drugs that once had been heralded as a radically discontinuous break with a hopelessly primitive past as timeless classics.  Two similar advertisements in the American Journal of Psychiatry recast 'Stelazine' as classic, traditional, and perhaps even an historical masterpiece.  In one (Figure 3.12), a photograph showing a bust of Beethoven contains the text: “Some things are hard to improve upon.”  On the opposing page, the message “'Stelazine' A Classic Antipsychotic” stands above a comparison between trifluorperazine and Beethoven's Fifth Symphony (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1981a, pp. A46–A47).  One is tempted to take this as a highly ironic affirmation of a point made almost four decades earlier by Horkheimer and Adorno (2002), dismissing the phenomenon of 'me-too' antipsychotics as a sort of “caricature of style” that contrasts with the “genuine style of the... great [psychopharmacological] artists... who adopted style as a rigor to set against the chaotic expression of suffering”  (p. 103).  An advertisement (Figure 3.13) appearing a few months later similarly compared trifluorperazine to Homer's Iliad (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1981b, pp. A30–A31).  

Source: Advertisement in the American Journal of Psychiatry (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1981a, pp. A46–A47).


Source: Advertisement in the American Journal of Psychiatry (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1981b, pp. A30–A31).
	Today, with the patents long expired on these drugs, pharmaceutical companies are much less eager to come to the defense of these canonical classics of modern medicine.  Instead, they now champion the 'atypical' class of antipsychotics, modeled after the dibenzodiazapine drug clozapine ('Clozaril'), a remarkably effective drug that was relatively less likely to produce extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) like tardive dyskinesia, the bane of patients treated with traditional antipsychotics.89  Psychiatrists today, however, sometimes discuss the difficulty in improving on the classic antipsychotics, as in Michael Taylor's jeremiad against the “malignant influence of the pharmaceutical industry on the prescribing of psychotropic agents”:
Another fiction is that medical psychiatric treatments are better today than they were 40 years ago... The newer antidepressant medications, mood stabilizers, and antipsychotic agents have no greater efficacy than the older agents.  The second-generation TCAs and lithium still have the best efficacy data and side effect profile... Psychiatrists accept the promotional fictions of industry and insist that unlike the rest of human kind we are not influenced by advertising.  We are.  (Taylor, 2013, p. 146)90
Similarly, referring to the genetic categories of 'first-generation antipsychotics' (FGAs) and 'second-generation antipsychotics' (SGAs), Kendall (2011) argues, on the basis of a meta-analysis of 150 studies comparing antipsychotic drugs, that “there are no consistent differences between atypicals and typicals, SGAs and FGAs... The story of the atypicals and the SGAs is not the story of clinical discovery and progress; it is the story of fabricated classes, money and marketing” (p. 267).  His conclusion, affirming that “they are all just plain antipsychotics,” reinforces the idea that like, perhaps, epic lyric poetry, some things are just hard to improve upon (p. 268)
	The pharmaceutical industry obviously has no need to maintain consistency in its messaging and, as I noted, the messages do complement one another in emphasizing the fundamental distinctiveness of the psychiatric drugs discovered in the 1950s.  “Rhetoremes” recirculate through the historical discourses of pharmaceutical reason, rewriting psychiatry's relationship with its past (Salazar, 2011, p. 103).  Chapter 4 will explore the negative effects of the temporal dislocation that accompanies the reconfiguration of diagnostic categories for the controversy over 'psychosis risk.'  These advertisements reveal the ways in which modern psychiatry views its own historical timeline, and illustrates how the forms of past appeals can re-emerge, presenting rhetorical liabilities and opportunities.
Schizophrenia & Psychosis Today
	As the concept of schizophrenia developed over the course of the twentieth century, it became closely paired with the concept of psychosis.  In DSM-5, it appears in the section ‘Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders’ (American Psychiatric Association, 2012b).  Like the DSM-IV and ICD-10 classifications, the DSM-5 classification of schizophrenia is firmly within the (neo-)Kraepelinian tradition, built upon the concept of the disease entity, and with the basic assumption that clinical symptoms, longitudinal course and prognosis, and brain pathology are closely linked.  Furthermore, the modern conceptual understanding of psychosis descends from Erwin Stransky's notion of intrapsychical discoordination, which Eugen Bleuler popularized as a loosening of associations within the psyche.  Once the will, emotions, and cognitions of a patient are disconnected in the context of a ‘formal thought disorder,’ the patient is fundamentally disconnected from reality.  
      This break with reality is key to the modern understanding of schizophrenia and psychosis.  Bleuler’s formulation of schizophrenia resides not in the contemporary psychotic disorders so much as in the dissociative disorders, which are characterized by “a disruption in the usually integrated functions of consciousness, memory, identity, or perception of the environment” (American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 477).  Whether by perceiving objects that do not exist (hallucinations), believing things that are manifestly false (delusions), speaking so incoherently that meaningful intersubjective interaction cannot occur (disorganized communication), or withdrawal from the world in emotion (flat affect) and intention (avolition), psychosis manifests as a loss of contact with reality.  The critical test is whether an individual maintains ‘reality testing’ procedures.  For example, if a patient hears voices but attempts to verify whether the source is external (recognizing the possibility that the ‘voices’ are in fact auditory hallucinations), the patient is not psychotic; if, on the other hand, the patient cannot be convinced (having ‘delusional conviction’) that his or her hallucinatory perceptions are unreal, the patient suffers from 'frank psychosis.'  
	This modern idea of psychosis is a rearticulation of the ancient idea of madness.  The psychotic patient is out of reach, disconnected from the objective material world by delusions and perceptual disturbances, from the intersubjective world by grossly disorganized communication, from the subjective world by affective flattening and other negative symptoms, and from the industrialized modern world by severe functional impairments.  Before Hippocrates, such a disconnection was brought about by divine or alien intrusion into the human body; for Hippocrates, by an imbalance of liquids within the body creating a disturbance within the brain; and for nineteenth and twentieth-century alienists and psychiatrists influenced by faculty psychology, by a loosening of intrapsychic associations.  Today, the pathophysiology of psychosis is understood largely as it was in the past, albeit expressed in the techno-scientific language of neurobiology and materiality.  Just as Hippocrates and Galen converted the spiritualized accounts of disease into physiological ones, modern neurobiologists have done the same to the older psychodynamic explanations that seemingly have passed away.  Instead of imbalanced humors, we see disturbed neurotransmission postulated by the dopamine hypothesis (too much dopamine) and the glutamate hypothesis (not enough glutamate) of schizophrenia (Laruelle, Kegeles, & Abi-Dargham, 2003; Moghaddam & Javitt, 2011; J. M. Stone, Morrison, & Pilowsky, 2007; Swerdlow & Koob, 1987).91  
      As we have come to expect, these hypotheses lend themselves to iconic representation:
[Molecular] brain processes had become accepted enough to be represented in conventionalized visual simulations, ...replete with images simulating the neuronal processes underlying different pathologies... In Stahl’s iconography, each neurotransmitter is allotted a distinct icon—norepinephrine, for example is a triangle—and each receptor is illustrated with a reciprocal icon—in this case a rectangle with a triangle shape cut out—into which the neurotransmitter fits like a key into a lock… These powerful and compelling simulations combine a matter-of-fact materiality, iconic character, and languid truthfulness.  They also diagram a molecular specificity of different types of disorder.  Once imagined in this way, pathologies can be illustrated visually as variations from this “normal” state… Schizophrenia can be…illustrated with a moving image of a synapse with dopamine molecules jumping across it—clearly an excess of them in the “schizophrenic brain.” (N. S. Rose, 2007, pp. 200–201)
These illustrations of madness lack any representations of the mentally ill patient, but reintroduce a human element by anthropomorphizing some of the molecular elements.
	Stahl’s (2008) illustration of a variant of the glutamate hypothesis (Figure 3.14) provides a fascinating example of this kind of move.  For reasons that are not entirely clear, walking individuals each holding a sign—politically ‘radical’ protesters, perhaps—stand in for “toxic free radicals” that have been “generated in the neurodegenerative process of excitotoxicity” (Stahl, 2008, p. 442).  The “neuroprotective” drug—a “free radical scavenger”—that comes to the rescue appears to be Pac-Man’s evil twin, a yellow spherical monster with sharp teeth and eerie red eyes.  The limp corpse of one activist, still hanging from the jaws of one of these neuroprotective agents, no longer capable of grasping the sign that has now fallen to the ground, evidences the effectiveness of this “novel glutamatergic treatment” supposedly depicted in the scene of carnage.  All of this action takes place presumably on the surface of a neuron, next to a massive structure apparently representing the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor protein and ligand-gated ion channel.  The small yellow circles represent the ultimate source of the free radicals: calcium ions (Ca2+) flowing into the neuron.  Another illustration (Figure 3.15) signifies this process whereby “dangerous enzymes... produce troublesome free radicals” (p. 306).  A third depicts a scenario in which free radicals are left unchecked (Figure 3.16).  This illustration connects a molecular event to a lesioned neuron, which is associated with nearby icons representing psychotic symptoms.


Source: Illustration in the popular textbook Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications  (Stahl, 2008, p. 442).

Source: Illustration in the popular textbook Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications (Stahl, 2008, p. 306).

Source: Illustration in the popular textbook Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications (Stahl, 2008, p. 307).
      Ideas about the health of the individual and ideas about the health of a society tend to be closely related, which is why health-related metaphors show up so frequently in socio-political discussions.  Paradigmatically, in his Republic, Plato contrasts a ‘healthy’ city with a ‘feverish’ one (Plato, 1997d, sec. 372e–373a).  In Stahl's illustrations, we see the same move in reverse, with a socio-political metaphor showing up in expert biomedical discourse (specifically, in a technical textbook for medical students, physicians, psychopharmacologists, and neuroscientists—not a lay audience).  Are Stahl's degenerate ‘radicals,’ walking a picket line or attending a political rally, a toxic source of madness afflicting our society?  The images certainly contain authoritarian overtones that recall a time when, some believed, psychiatry stood simply for the involuntarily confinement of social deviants.  Other illustrations in the text suggest that Stahl understands the molecular action of pharmaceutical agents in disciplinary terms.  For example, his icon for donepezil ('Aricept'), a reversible acetylcholinesterase inhibitor used to manage the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease, is a straitjacket marked with the American and Japanese flags (Figure 3.17).  The flags, which distinguish donepezil from the other compounds also iconically reduced to straitjackets, were presumably chosen because the Japanese pharmaceutical company Eisai developed the drug, and the American-based multinational pharmaceutical corporation Pfizer marketed it.
      

Source: Illustration in the popular textbook Stahl's Essential Psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific Basis and Practical Applications (Stahl, 2008, p. 924).
      Just as humoral rhetoric finds contemporary application in the representations of molecular neurotransmission dysfunction, the residues of the rhetorical histories of medicine form an epistemic assemblage with structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technologies, which encourage researchers to see the brain in terms of deficiencies and excesses of white and gray matter and in terms of normal or abnormal anatomical structures. The discursively constructed MRI imagery works to persuade the world that the psychic ‘lesions’ of schizophrenia take the material form of deficiencies in the volume of gray matter in the medial temporal lobe, heteromodal association cortex, and superior temporal gyrus (Falkai, Schmitt, & Cannon, 2011).  Channeling Virchow, these deficits were conceived initially as cellular lesions (E. C. Johnstone, Frith, Crow, Husband, & Kreel, 1976), but newer developments in neuroimaging technology, including diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and in vivo functional MRI (fMRI), revealed problems with the myelin or axonal membrane in cortical regions, as well as unusually low white matter anistrophy, all of which suggested to neuroscientists that the neural networks of psychotic patients were losing connections between neurons (Davis et al., 2003; Jafri, Pearlson, Stevens, & Calhoun, 2008; Josin & Liddle, 2001; Kubicki et al., 2007; Vercammen, Knegtering, den Boer, Liemburg, & Aleman, 2010).  With this, a mechanistic physiological account—the “disconnection hypothesis of schizophrenia”—of schizophrenia's conceptual ‘loosening of associations’ was born (Friston, 1998, p. 115).92  
Conclusion
	Before moving to the next chapter, I shall summarize this chapter's key findings.  First, we examined the enduring presence of old epistemic models as the field of medicine developed, the first and primary example of which was humorism.  I argue that the humoral model's longevity was not due to its 'accuracy,' in the positivist sense of enabling one to make falsifiable predictions.  Rather, I explain its success rhetorically.  Humorism provided an architectonic communicative structure to the field of medicine that infiltrated linguistic structures and other fields of knowledge, effectively used visual appeals to justify its claims, and was remarkably robust in adapting to new findings, innovations, and situations through a process of “casuistic stretching,” that is, “introducing new principles while theoretically remaining faithful to old principles” (Burke, 1984a, p. 229).  This capacity was not unlimited, and, eventually, the model became so unbalanced that it no longer was tenable.  The modern 'scientific' approaches to medicine displaced the humoral architectonic.  As I argue, humorism survives today in fragmented hybrid discourses that contribute to the overall polytechtonic rhetoric of contemporary psychiatric nosology.
	One major finding is that a persuasive epistemic model that manages to stay persuasive from one generation to the next—i.e., that successfully reproduces itself—does so by spreading through cultural channels, using figures of speech to travel between contexts and fields.  That the humoral model of pathology was so successful speaks to the persuasiveness of the rhetorical forms to which it gave rise.  By embedding itself in the language of everyday life, its forms continue to circulate today: when we frame pathology in terms of imbalance, deficiency, and excess; when we speak of personality as temperament; when we appeal to synechdochic imagery to communicate ideas about new disease constructs; when we buy and sell the endless array of dietary supplements available to the health consumer; when we sip a dry wine while watching a dark comedy.  In these examples we see some of the substantive ideas of humoral pathology (illness is caused by chemical imbalance), its ordering structure (health is holistic and continuous), and its implications (a disordered personality is as much a health issue as a disordered organ, and moreover, its cause is a disordered organ).  It has infiltrated our language to such a degree that we no longer have any idea that words like temperature, temperament, and temperate have anything to do with one another, let alone that they originate in humoral pathology.
	As successful as humorism was (and is), it is even more remarkable that the more mythical understanding of illness that it supplanted also remains with us today.  We refer, for example, to a convulsive episode as a 'seizure' even though we do not believe it to be the result of a supernatural entity taking temporary possession of the body.  The transition from this mythical view to the more 'scientific' humoral model also remains as an ideal.  Yet what remains of the mythical are not merely the fossilized linguistic remnants of a forgotten age, but an enduring point of contact.  Consider, for example, the history of the dissociative disorders (DD).  We have already examined the rise and fall of animal magnetism, which Mesmer positioned as a 'scientific' alternative to possession and exorcism.  As for the underlying disorder, it made its way into DSM-III:
With a change in the dominant paradigms for understanding (and expressing) mental illness, the possession states did not abruptly cease to exist.  Instead, what we now call MPD [multiple personality disorder] and DDNOS [dissociative disorder not otherwise specified] began to be described in the literature without a supernatural explanation...  [These] conditions are no more than the secular expression of the same psychological structures that were found in the Judeo-Christian possession syndromes.  MPD is the contemporary demystified form of an anthropological commonplace. (Kluft, 1993, p. 88)
Noll (2014) suggests that this nosological move constituted an expansion of “the jurisdictional boundary of 'scientific' psychiatry and [colonization of] the supernatural,” but “the blurring of this boundary” that allowed psychiatrists to claim “superior therapeutic expertise for techniques that had formerly been the province of magico-religious practioners (exorcists)... would backfire, pulling many of them into the rip tide of Satanic panic” (p. 2).93  This 'Satanic panic' came in the form of thousands of MPD patients who, through hypnosis, 'recovered' memories of Satanic ritual abuse from their childhood, which they had 'repressed.'  Institutionalizing the diagnosis of MPD did not supplant the mythical notion that people could be possessed by evil spirits; to the contrary, it simply created a hybrid scientific-supernatural construct which validated the mythical idea along with the ensuing moral panic about Satanic cults.  As Allen Frances remarked in a comment on Noll's article on April 3, 2014, “modern man has acquired remarkable knowledge but is still capable of remarkably primitive thinking and cruel action.”94
	The early modern transitional period during which humorism lost its hegemonic grip on medical science began with Thomas Sydenham, who popularized quinine as a treatment for malaria, founded the field of epidemiology, and introduced the ontological concepts of syndrome and discrete disease entity.  Sydenham challenged the prevailing association between hysteria and the uterus.  Equipped with the ontological interpretation, Sydenham distinguished between symptoms and disease entities, which led to his insight that hysteria was most likely a mental illness.  Later physicians, who rejected this view, re-imagined the illness in terms of bodily 'vapors.'  The vapors became an immensely popular illness in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and the phenomenon attracted epidemiological social critique that associated it with gender, sexual behavior, and social class.  Twentieth-century psychoanalysts reformulated the disorder again as 'conversion disorder,' an illness in which inner psychic tension 'converts' into somatic distress.  Finally, the DSM-5 Somatic Distress Disorders Work Group (later renamed the Somatic Symptoms Disorders Work Group) attempted to re-brand the disorder as 'functional neurological disorder.'  Each transition point represents a major shift in substantive theory and rhetorical form.  The DSM-5 controversy concerned how psychiatry should come to terms with these accumulated theories and forms, rather than any genuinely scientific matter.
      Rudolph Virchow's physiological interpretation of pathology helps explain how hysteria became vaporous.  In the wake of major developments in the science of human anatomy down to the cellular level, physiological pathology represented a backlash against the metaphysical elements of the ontological interpretation.  Similar to humorism, the physiological interpretation cast pathology as the result of disordered processes in the body, which often manifested as visible organic lesions.  Physicians looked for physiological damage proximate to the clinical signs and symptoms.  Hysteria causes a wide range of symptoms in every area of body, so the unseen physiological cause must be something that could move throughout the body from one organ system to another.  Hence, the vapors.
      Rudolph Virchow had originally conceived of the physiological interpretation as an alternative to the ontological interpretation, but by the end of his career, he argued that the two interpretations were actually compatible.  Therefore, I analyzed the integration of the two terministic screens, one emphasizing continuity, the other discontinuity.  As this strange discursive permutation came into existence, the influence of faculty psychology enabled physicians to apply the physiological model metaphorically to the mind.  A greater understand of neuroanatomy partially undid this metaphor by suggesting disorders of the mind were in fact disorders of the brain.  These developments coincided with the conceptual transformation of the asylum from a prison to a hospital at the turn of the nineteenth century.  All together, I argue, these antecedents brought the field of psychiatry into existence.
	My analysis of psychosis reveals that it does not have a single rhetorical history, but several.  As an object of knowledge, psychosis only came into existence in late modernity, and only after early psychiatrists (alienists) realized that they could break down madness into nosological sub-categories.  Physicians working in other specialties of medicine (which, indeed, had only recently acquired multiple specialties) had fairly recently carried out similar projects in their subfields.  The first major systematizing effort we examined was by Esquirol, who made extensive use of visual rhetoric to persuade his colleagues that he had identified a useful new way of 'seeing' madness.  After Esquirol, the varieties of madness continued to proliferate.  The next major systematizing effort we examined was by Kraepelin, who joined together several disparate recently identified varieties of madness into the common diagnosis of dementia praecox, a syndrome unified by a new pathological category: prognostic course over time.  Psychosis thus was first fragmented into variants that then were re-associated with one another by reference to temporal deterioration.  Finally, Bleuler, focusing on the splitting of intra-psychic associations, rebranded the quintessential psychotic disorder as schizophrenia.
	A striking feature of this development is the blurring of form and content.  A new way of seeing becomes accepted as an innovation if knowledge workers in a field are persuaded of its worth.  Thus, the innovative the?ria (??????) becomes a epistemic stock upon which rhetorical forms may trade.  The microscope enables one to see a cell, but in that image of the microscopic, the microscope itself is visible.  So also with nosologies.  Longitudinal observation of the ill allows one to distinguish one form of illness from another, but soon the idea of temporal course itself becomes a category of illness.
	The cases in this chapter highlight the importance of visual appeals in epistemic rhetoric.  Esquirol's illustrations of his patients were effective not because they showed anyone anything about mental illness, but because they worked enthymematically to suggest that, with the aid of this new epistemic system, readers could now 'see' a new object of knowledge that had previously been invisible.  Subsequent advocates of nosological models in psychiatry (including pharmaceutical marketing departments) over the past two centuries made use of the same rhetorical form.  I have provided several examples of this phenomenon, the occurrence of which is all the more remarkable because these visual appeals contain no useful scientific information.
	The analyses in this chapter suggest that as new scientific models and theories develop, they supplement old theories rather than overturn them.  Like humorism, this is true of the modern post-humoral terministic screens of pathology, the ontological and physiological interpretations.  Within psychiatric nosologies, this is true of psychodynamic and biomedical approaches.  Each new model that reveals something that had been invisible provides an enduring set of rhetorical forms through which advocates render scientific (and pseudo-scientific) theories persuasive.  In this sense, the accumulation of these rhetorical residues facilitates communication.  But in a different way, it inhibits communication by introducing incommensurate objects of knowledge, often sharing a common name.  As Lakoff's (2005) study of psychiatric clinical practices in Argentina demonstrates, this can create confusion when clinicians with very different nosological orientations come together to discuss particular cases.  By the same token, these points of confusion also become the seeds of controversy.  It is tough to find consensus when the field teeters between two ends, but the contest gets worse when aggressive or restrictive judgments are debated as to whether to name new diseases or rename old ones.  
	As the next chapter will show, the strategic ambiguity needed to forge consensus can later result in irresolvable dissensus if the meaning of a key term remains unclarified.  In the case of psychosis risk syndrome, sometimes researchers will, in the same publication, express two mutually exclusive understandings of the meaning of risk, a consequence of the etiological nihilism introduced in DSM-III.
CHAPTER FOUR: PSYCHOSIS RISK SOCIETY
“Sometimes, in order to see the light, you have to risk the dark.” – Dr. Iris Hineman95

“[Calumny] and flattery have so prospered with some men, as to have given them the power of making you believe, that in things of little consequence, as for instance, opthalmies, and fevers, and intestine complaints, the gods condescend to act as your advisers, and sometimes even your physicians; but that in matters wherein the interest of the state, and your own individual security are concerned, these same gods [fail to provide] council... A wise man will not wait till the earth sends forth vapor, or the atmosphere is infected, if evil comes from above; but he will perceive such things are at hand, not so soon as the gods, yet sooner than the generality of men.  The gods see what is to come, men what is come, and wise men what is coming.” – Apollonius of Tyanna96   

“You have to believe in fate—science can compel you to.  What then grows out of this belief in your case—cowardice, resignation, or frankness and magnanimity—bears witness to the soil upon which that seedcorn has been scattered but not, however, to the seedcorn itself—for out of this anything and everything can grow.” – Friedrich Nietzsche97

“With rare exceptions... the natural sciences are content to study, to investigate, to establish facts.  But in our attempts to cope with ambiguity and uncertainty, we create facts... If this is acceptable, then we must not be judged by the ordinary criteria of science, pure or applied.  We are engaged in a different sort of undertaking—a permanent experiment with risk taking, a prolonged and loving engagement with uncertainty on behalf of the mentally disabled.  It is a proud and desirable calling.  And, if we can contain ourselves comfortably within its constraints, the world will continue to reward our efforts.” – John Spiegel98

***
	This chapter examines the category of disease as a rhetorical object.  It explores the ways in which defining some state of affairs as a disease or illness—what I will call a medicalization controversy—motivates action.  I examine the rhetorical maneuvers of interlocutors engaged in a medicalization controversy, and highlight some problems with the evaluations of the argumentation.  According to a general deliberative practice, benefits are weighed against risks – but what happens when the benefits are characterized as the management of known risks associated with inaction, and the particularly dispositive risks of action are important precisely because they are unknown?  
	The main controversy under review in this chapter concerns the proposal to formalize a diagnosis of 'psychosis risk syndrome.'  Though the proposed diagnosis has been incredibly controversial, the idea of diagnosing a risk syndrome for schizophrenia has been embraced by the mental health profession, and over 100 clinics devoted to the cause have been set up over the last decade (Kecmanovi?, 2011).  As a syndrome, it is characterized by a constellation of signs and symptoms that by their clustering together suggests a medically relevant morbid unity, an underlying disease process that can be called by name, with a prognosis that can be speculated on, and, in an ideal world, that will respond to a specific indicated treatment.  As a risk syndrome, the underlying disease process is not necessarily present, but its future presence is anticipated on account of the premonitory signs and symptoms that constitute the syndrome.  The very heated public battle over including psychosis risk syndrome in DSM-5 ended in somewhat of a draw, as the Task Force did include the putative condition (as 'attenuated psychosis syndrome'), but in a special section for 'conditions for further study,' with the explicit disclaimer that the “proposed criteria sets are not intended for clinical use” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 783).99   
	I argue that psychosis has always been about risk, and that schizophrenia is the quintessential psychosis risk syndrome.  The diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome is an expected development of the schizophrenia construct that matches with the contemporary societal orientations toward risk.  Further, I suggest that the final consensus about psychosis risk reflected in DSM-5 represents a temporary cease-fire between warring forces, pausing to consider the possibility that a greater threat exists to the integrity of psychiatric science.  In order to unfold this position I will consider classical views, indicate the configurations of world risk society, and then show how the DSM-5 becomes a contested space in which this issue is fought in terms of the inevitability and unpredictability of risk.  These moves are divided into four major sections.
	1. Risk in Antiquity and Early Modernity.  In order to understand the controversy about institutionalizing psychosis risk syndrome in DSM-5, we need to investigate how cultural resources were drawn forward from the time where fate and common-sense informed judgment to those where risk was understood as potential opportunity, lurking danger and, later, calculated probability.  In late modern epistemic efforts, risk no longer measures actual dangers, but sets the parameters of likelihood for populations.  The classic and modern points of view entered into the DSM-5 controversy through the distinct interpretations of risk that psychosis risk syndrome simultaneously signified.
	2. Psychiatric Rhetoric in a Risk Society.  Preoccupation with risk is pervasive across our late modern society, which Ulrich Beck (1992b) has called a risk society.  Sociologists use this term to describe a “society increasingly preoccupied with the future (and also with safety), which generates the notion of risk” (Giddens, 1999, p. 3).  Our society is a risk society not because there are more risks than there used to be (though there are), or because the risks we face are of greater magnitude than in former times and in some cases are existential (though this is the case as well); rather, risk society is so called because risk as both a logic and an object of knowledge has become a significant organizing principle of all major institutions (Beck, 1992a, 1992b, 1999, 2000; Beck, Giddens, & Lash, 1994; Danisch, 2010; Douglas, 1992; Giddens, 1991, 1999; Keränen, 2008, 2011; Lash, 2000; Luhmann, 1996, 2005; A. Scott, 2000; Van Loon, 2002).  Hence, a study of risk society may be grounded in any significant modern institution (Ericson & Haggerty, 1997).  This study of risk society vis-à-vis psychiatry (and more specifically psychiatric diagnostic controversy) examines “how forms of rationality inscribe themselves in practices or systems of practices, and what role they play within them, because... 'practices' don't exist without a certain regime of rationality” (Foucault, 1991, p. 79).  That is, I examine how risk, as a kind of rationality (or really a cluster of rationalities developed historically and reproduced discursively), has inscribed itself in the diagnostic and nosological practices of psychiatry and in the argument practices of those engaged in controversies concerning those practices.  This section examines a series of related diagnostic controversies (e.g., sluggish schizophrenia, pedohebephilic disorder, coercive paraphilia) that lurk in the shadows of psychosis risk.  
	3. Early Intervention Research.  This section examines the development of early intervention strategies to prevent psychosis.  These efforts occurred concurrently in different nosological frameworks.  To a greater or lesser degree, the various research programs shared three presuppositions: First, it is possible to identify susceptible individuals sufficiently early to allow time for intervention; second, it is possible to develop interventions that in some cases can prevent psychosis from developing; and third, there is an urgent need for such techniques because of the irreversible damage that occurs during a first psychotic episode.  The section begins with an exploration of Freud's views on the importance of early diagnosis.  It then turns to various twentieth-century nosological moves designed to better classify the prognosis of psychotic disorders.  It then examines the development of early intervention research programs, and concludes with the research of Patrick McGorry, a key figure in the DSM-5 controversy.
	4. Psychosis Risk Syndrome and DSM-5.  This section introduces the argumentative landscape of the controversy, identifying its essential arguments, stasis points, topoi, and tropes, and the ways in which the rhetorical agency of the key opinion leaders in the dispute is constrained and enabled.  Special attention is paid to how rhetors appeal to different conceptions of risk.  These arguments about risk, particularly those that compare one risk to another, enabled novel articulations of psychiatric illness.  However, representations of risk did not flow smoothly and consistently through the public and technical spheres.  The accumulated concepts of risk and ideas about preventive medicine recirculate in the discourses of psychosis risk.  On one hand, the notion of a psychosis prodrome in individual patients gives a neurobiological form to a hybridization of fate and danger.  On the other, classical phronesis combines with late modern Bayesian risk factors in a clinical population.  Participants in the controversy weigh the benefits of these interpretations with the costs, which they also articulate in the language of risk.  Some of these risks are known dangers (stigmatization, medication side-effects), while some are unknown risks about what the diagnosis will become once it moves from the marketplace of ideas to the marketplace.
Risk in Antiquity and Early Modernity
	In this section, I trace the historical development of risk as an object of knowledge and as a regime of rationality.  I begin by examining notions of risk or risk-like concepts in antiquity and early modernity, following and updating the traditional account given by Luhmann (2005) and Beck (1992b), paying special attention to the rhetorical implications of risk.  I then turn to  the ways in which these historical antecedents were transformed into the contemporary object of knowledge and subject of deliberation we understand as risk, focusing on the ways in which the concept co-evolved with the institution of psychiatry vis-à-vis the diagnostic entity of schizophrenia.  In the process, I discuss the historically controversial diagnosis of 'sluggish schizophrenia,' and the DSM-5 controversies surrounding pedohebephilia, coercive paraphilia, and parental alienation syndrome.  Finally, I turn to the specific question of preventive psychiatry and the efforts to develop and legitimize early interventions in psychosis, an idea that slowly evolved into the notion of psychosis risk syndrome.  I situate the controversy over psychosis risk syndrome that played out over the last half-decade in the larger context of developments and debates in the field stretching back into the 1980s and before, and I explain the key arguments and their implications in light of the larger issues of risk society and the rhetorical evolution of psychosis discussed in the previous chapter.
	The history of the concept of risk is closely intertwined with the history of modernity, yet has only recently appeared as an object of social scientific inquiry.  The development of risk as an object of knowledge serving as a motivator and product of human action is necessarily intertwined with the cluster of historical and sociological configurations that have characterized modernity, e.g., industrialization; secularization; capitalism; the nation-state; and the emergence, development, and rationalization of institutions that effect “the regularised control of social relations across indefinite time-space distances” (Giddens, 1991, p. 16).  In this section, I shall examine the pre-modern understanding of risk and contrast it with its modern conception, so as to highlight the aspects of risk that are distinctive features of modernity.  This analysis will clarify the extent to which the diagnosis of schizophrenia bears the signature of modernity.  Building on the arguments and themes developed in Chapter 2 and Chapter 3, I contend that the development of psychosis risk syndrome, and the surrounding controversy, is an artifact of the development of risk as an object of knowledge that occurred as early modernity gave way to its more reflexive second stage.
Risk and Unknown Fate
	In an important early study of the sociology of risk, Luhmann (1993/2005) argues that while humanity has always been concerned about the uncertain nature of the future, pre-modern societies tended to understand the future in terms of fate, over which their control was limited to divination rituals and practices of piety:
Older civilizations had…no need for a word covering what we now understand by the term risk…  For the most part…one trusted in divinatory practices, which—although unable to provide reliable security—nevertheless ensured that a personal decision did not arouse the ire of the gods or of other awesome powers, but was safeguarded by contact with the mysterious forces of fate.  In many respects the semantic complex of sin (conduct contravening religious instruction) also represents a functional equivalent, inasmuch as it can serve to explain how misfortune comes about. (Luhmann, 2005, p. 8)
Though risk as it is understood in modernity is novel,  Giddens (1991) argues that alternative conceptual variants have been a constant feature of history and have always been of central importance in human society:
[There] is no non-modern culture which does not in some sense incorporate, as a central part of its philosophy, the notions of fate and destiny.  The world is not seen as a direction-less swirl of events, in which the only ordering agents are natural laws and human beings, but as having intrinsic form which relates individual life to cosmic happenings. (p. 109)  
In ancient Greek mythology, even the gods were subject to the Moirai (??????), the Fates, whose name derived from the word moira (?????), meaning a portion of the whole—the Fates were literally 'apportioners' of the goods and dangers of life (Grimal, 1996; E. Hamilton, 1940; Harper, 2013).  At the same time, individuals could make decisions that would affect their destiny, but that destiny would unfold by necessity according to an unknown but preordained script.  Every person was driven toward his fate and inevitable death by Moros (?????), the spirit of doom, and the root of the word 'morose' (Lawson, 1994).
Risk as Dangerous Opportunity
      There were two words in ancient Greek that conveyed something akin to the modern idea of risk: kindynos (????????), a noun meaning danger, risk, hazard, or venture, and peira? (??????), a verb meaning to attempt, endeavor, or try one’s fortune.  Though the etymology of ???????? is unclear, the prefix kin- often indicates motion or action (as in the English words kinetic and cinema), and the root dyn usually means power or force or ability (as in the English words dynamic and dynamite).  In practice, the word had a dual meaning, with a sense both of danger and of opportunity.  Consider the discussion between Glaucon and Socrates in Book V of the Republic, concerning whether children should be brought to war:
Socrates: …Every animal fights better in the presence of its young.
Glaucon: That’s so. But, Socrates, there’s a considerable danger [????????] that in a defeat—and such things are likely to happen in a war—they’ll lose their children’s lives as well as their own, making it impossible for the rest of the city to recover.
Socrates: What you say is true.  But do you think that the first thing we should provide for is the avoidance of all danger [???????????]?
Glaucon: Not at all.
Socrates: Well, then, if people will probably have to face some danger [????????????], shouldn’t it be the sort that will make them better if they come through it successfully?
Glaucon: Obviously.
Socrates: And do you think that whether or not men who are going to be warriors observe warfare when they’re still boys makes such a small difference that it isn’t worth the danger [????????] of having them do it?100  (Plato, 1997d, sec. V.467b–c)
In this passage, it is clear that the outcomes of the risk were not as important as the experience of taking the risk.  The future is not predictable, but it will unfold by necessity as it is so fated.  Risk is understood as a kind of action antithetical to the avoidance of danger.  
      Likewise, in the Phaedo, Socrates, imprisoned and soon to be executed, explains to his followers why he did not attempt to escape, arguing that while suicide is not morally permissible (because no one owns their own body, as it is the property of the gods), the opportunity to die by someone else's hand is a risk worth taking.  Here Socrates provides the first technical explanation of his theory of the Forms, after which he sums up his position thusly:
Because of the things we have enunciated, Simmias, one must make every effort to share in virtue and wisdom in one’s life, for the reward is beautiful and the hope is great.  No sensible man would insist that these things are as I have described them, but I think it is fitting for a man to risk [???????????] the belief—for the risk [????????] is a noble one—that this, or something like this, is true about our souls and their dwelling places, since the soul is evidently immortal, and a man should repeat this to himself as if it were an incantation, which is why I have been prolonging my tale… Now you, Simmias, Cebes and the rest of you, Socrates continued, will each take that tragic journey at some other time, but my fated day calls me now, as a tragic character might say, and it is about time for me to have my bath, for I think it better to have it before I drink the poison and save the women the trouble of washing the corpse.101  (Plato, 1977, sec. 114c–115a)
Even though Socrates’s fate has already been set, his decision to drink the poison and end his life is a manifestation of his risky belief in the immortality of his soul.  Taking this sort of risk was often signified by the verb ??????, probably related etymologically to the Latin word per?culum, meaning danger, risk; trial, attempt, or test, and both words are likely related to the English words peril and experiment (Lombroso, 2006; Skeat, 2013; Traupman, 1966).
Risk and Fortune
	Another ancient view of risk, fortune, united the ideas of risk as an unknown fate and as a dangerous opportunity.  With the future largely in the hands of the goddess Fortuna (in Roman antiquity), the ‘unpredictable’ chance element of events was projected externally, so that human decision-making was largely a matter of pr?dentia:
An increasing risk awareness apparently became neutralized by attributing possible future successes and damages to an external source… [which] explained, albeit in a metaphorical way, the unpredictability of events and the unforeseeable choice between good and bad outcomes. External attribution protected the decision maker from responsibility in the field of future contingencies.  Prudence was viewed as the capacity of humans (as distinct from animals) to choose between reasonable expectations, contingent on the actions of other people.  So prudence, not risk, was the term for the capability to cope with temporal and social contingencies. (Luhmann, 1996, p. 3)
The approach to risk called for practical wisdom, using prudence (phron?sis, ????????) and self-control (s?phrosyn?, ?????????; literally, 'healthy-mindedness')102  in the ‘right way’ (eukairos, ????????), and the apprehension of kairos (??????), i.e., the supreme moment of opportunity in a situation, a concept of particular importance to rhetoricians.  Thus, with the two concepts of prudence and Fortune, it was possible to attribute responsibility for the outcome of uncertain events either internally or externally, respectively.  
	One rhetorician in particular who embraced these concepts was the sophist Isocrates.  In the Panathenaicus, Isocrates advanced a populist approach to practical wisdom:
[Those] who excel in arts [tas technas, ??? ??????], in sciences [tas epist?mas, ??? ?????????], and in specialized abilities [dynameis, ????????]…[for the most part] do not manage their own affairs well, are intolerable at private gatherings, have contempt for the opinions of their fellow citizens, and are filled with many other serious faults… Whom then do I call educated, since I exclude those in the arts…and sciences…and [specialties]? …[Those] who manage well the daily affairs of their lives and can form an accurate judgment [doxan, ?????] about a situation [kair?n, ??????] and in most cases can figure out [stochazesthai, ???????????] what is the best course of action [tou sympherontos, ??? ???????????]… [as well as] those who are not corrupted by their good fortune, do not abandon their true selves, or become arrogant, but on the contrary, remain in the ranks of those with good sense and do not rejoice more in the successes that come to them by chance than in those that come through their own nature and good sense [phronimous, ?????????].103 (Isocrates, 2004b, sec. 29–32)
There is a clear ethical dimension in one’s relationship with kismet, a sense that the prudent man who exercises good sense in the face of uncertainty is also a man of virtue.  This is even more explicit in Nicocles, in which Isocrates suggests that moral vice is inherently dangerous:
Understand that the unjust acquisition of property will not make you rich but will put you at risk [????????].  Do not think that taking is a profit, and losing is a penalty.  Neither of these always has the same effect, but whichever of these should occur at the right moment [??????] and with virtue benefits those who do it.  (Isocrates, 2000, sec. 50)  
Similarly, in Archidamus, Isocrates connects this ethical component with pragmatism, contending that neither “war or peace is entirely bad or good, but how each one turns out must always depend on how someone makes use of the situation [pragmata, ????????] and the opportunities [kairoi, ??????] it presents” (Isocrates, 2004a, sec. 50).  In all these cases, the human decision-making element is understood in relation to the externalized and uncontrollable whims of fate:
[Choosing] the propitious moment was entrusted to intuition, but was also subject to rational decision making. Neither too early nor too late, now or never – this pattern of thinking was applied in an effort to cope with risk situations.  And Fortuna had to help, but could also refuse or only pretend to do so.  She appeared only in close association with Virtus, aiding and encouraging the diligent.  Closely related thereto we find warnings against carelessness and foolhardiness, against a demonstrative use of courage and force incommensurate with the situation. (Luhmann, 2005, p. 150)
For the most part, the outcomes of dangerous and unpredictable situations was a matter of good fortune or bad fortune—the only thing that human actors had complete control over was the ethicality of their responses, understood in very practical terms.
Risk as the Management of Uncertainty
	In a world of uncertainty, the ancient art of risk management was rhetoric.  This view can be seen in the thought of Philo of Alexandria, a Hellenistic Jewish philosopher who engaged in many debates with the sophists of his day, and who serves as our best first-century CE witness to the emerging Second Sophistic period (Winter, 1997).  Philo developed an Isocratean view of rhetoric, prudence, and wisdom, in what I might playfully call a proto-Freudian direction.  In his commentary on the Patriarch Joseph (one of the twelve sons of Jacob/Israel, whose story, involving the interpretation of several dreams, features prominently in the Book of Genesis), Philo describes the art of rhetoric as being akin to the interpretation of the dreams of the awake:
And men awake too, who, as far as the uncertain character of their comprehension goes, are in no respect different from people asleep, deceiving themselves, think themselves competent to contemplate the nature of things with reasoning powers which cannot err... Since, then, life is full of all this irregularity, and confusion, and indistinctness, it is necessary... [to] approach the science of the interpretation of dreams, so as to understand the dreams and visions which appear by day, ...being guided by probable conjectures and rational probabilities, and in this way [the rhetor] must explain each separate one, and show that such and such a thing is honourable, another disgraceful, that this is good or that is bad; that this thing is just, that thing is on the contrary unjust; and so on in the same way with respect to prudence, and courage, and piety, and holiness, and expediency, and usefulness; and in like manner of the opposite things, with respect to what was not useful nor reasonable, what was ignoble, impious, unholy, inexpedient, pernicious, and selfish.  (Philo, 1993, pp. 446–447)
Though psychoanalytic approaches (particularly those of a Lacanian flavor) to rhetorical studies have become popular recently (Lundberg, 2012), Philo seems to have anticipated this development 2000 years in advance.  The management of uncertainty through the pursuit of rational probabilities is a notion at the heart of the concept of risk as it emerged at the beginning of modernity.  
	The modern term ‘risk’ appeared as a neologism at some point during the transition from the Middle Ages to the early modern period.  The Oxford English Dictionary (“Risk,” 2012) provides a couple of possible etymological histories of the English word ‘risk.’  Though noting that this theory is poorly supported by documentary evidence, the OED suggests that the post-classical Latin noun resicum, risicum, riscus may be derived from the classical Latin verb for cutting (resec?, resec?re, resectum) suggesting a meaning of rock, crag, or reef, drawing a connection to the thirteenth-century Spanish noun el risco, which means ‘the reef, the shallows, the cliff, the rock.’  Luhmann suggests that in “the Middle Ages the term risicum was used in highly specific contexts, above all sea trade and its ensuing legal problems in cases of losses or damages” (Luhmann, 1996, p. 3).  Reefs certainly posed a serious hazard to the seafaring, and Luhmann notes that “maritime insurance is an early instance of planned risk control” (1993/2005, p. 9).
	The enduring association of risk with the reef can be seen in Figure 4.1, an advertisement by Janssen Pharmaceuticals appearing in Psychiatric News that warns of the “serious consequences” posed by the “hidden danger” of “partial compliance” to antipsychotic medication in schizophrenia.  



Source: Advertisement in Psychiatric News (Janssen Pharmaceuticals, 2006).
A list of risk factors for this behavior are provided, including “delusional ideas or beliefs, such as thinking the medication is poison” and “a tendency to discontinue medication when feeling better.”  This specific kind of risk representation is discussed in at length later in this chapter.
	Slowly, from the beginning of the sixteenth century, the use of the term risk diffused into other contexts like politics and religion, as in Pascal’s wager (Reith, 1999).  In one of the earliest works of modern political philosophy, Machiavelli argued that “it may be true that fortune is the ruler of half our actions, but... she allows the other half or a little less to be governed by us” (Machiavelli, 1903, p. 99).  The significance of the neologism for Luhmann is that it marks a change in thought, a new discursive or rhetorical motive that was unfulfilled by existing words: “we may assume that a new term comes into use to indicate a problem situation that cannot be expressed precisely enough with the vocabulary available” (Luhmann, 2005, p. 10).
 	Though an understanding of risk is a central component of the configuration of knowledge that characterizes a period of human history, the ancient world was not quite as monolithic in its approach to risk as the sociologists of risk make it out to be (e.g., Eidinow, 2007; Luhmann, 2005).  In the history of medicine, there are frequently efforts to read the present into the past, especially in psychiatry—the differences between the modern ideas of bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder and the ancient notions of melancholia and mania are much larger than they are often portrayed (Healy, 1997, 2008).  With risk, the opposite phenomenon exists: Rather than emphasize a supposed continuity with the past, the stress is on the putative uniqueness of the present.  Neither approach is, strictly speaking, incorrect, insofar as one is interested in accurately representing some historical set of facts.  These kinds of comparisons between some present object of knowledge and its historical counterpart, in which one’s central purpose is to represent the past as especially similar or dissimilar to the present, are less about establishing historical truths than about cultivating an attitude about the object in its current form.  
	With respect to our self-understanding of risk in late modernity, the characterization of its historical antecedents as radically different from its present form enacts a basic feature of modern risk, which
reverses the relationship of past, present, and future.  The past loses its power to determine the present.  Its place as the cause of present-day experience and action is taken by the future, that is to say, something non-existent, constructed and fictitious. (Beck, 1999, p. 137)  
With respect to early intervention for psychosis, we will see the temporal inversion of modernity manifest in several ways.  One of these is the belief, constantly expressed over a fifty-year period, that preventive research has about a fifteen-year history.  Another is the confused conceptual slippage between a prodrome (in which present symptoms help establish the probable existence of a disease process initiated in the past) and a risk syndrome (in which present symptoms establish the probable existence of a disease state that will emerge in the future).  I shall discuss these issues in depth shortly.
	Though there is certainly some basis in fact for the argument that risk as an object of knowledge has fundamentally changed over time, some aspects that we tend to regard as novel are traceable to a premodern era.  The closest example from Greek antiquity of the modern concept of risk can be found in Xenophon’s last work, Ways and Means, written about 50 years after Plato penned his final dialogue.  Xenophon—like Plato, a student of Socrates—was writing in the context of a Greek (specifically Athenian) fiscal crisis.  In Ways and Means, Xenophon outlines his plan to restore prosperity to the city-state.  In Book IV, Xenophon discusses the possibility of managing the risks entailed in digging new silver mines:
[27]…It is as possible now to open new veins as in former times.  Nor can one say with any certainty whether the ore is more plentiful in the area already under work or in the unexplored tracts.  [28] Then why, it may be asked, are fewer new cuttings made nowadays than formerly?  Simply because those interested in the mines are poorer.  For operations have only lately been resumed, and a man who makes a new cutting incurs a serious risk [???????? ?? ?????].  If he strikes good stuff he makes a fortune; but if he is [29] disappointed, he loses [?????????]104 the money he has spent.  Therefore people nowadays are very chary of taking such a risk [????????].105 [30]  However, I think I can meet this difficulty too, and suggest a plan that will make the opening of new cuttings a perfectly safe undertaking. The Athenians, of course, are divided into ten tribes.  Now assume that the state were to offer each tribe an equal number of slaves, and that when new cuttings were made, the tribes were to pool their luck [???????????? ??? ?????].106 [31] The result would be that if one tribe found silver, the discovery would be profitable to all; and if two, three, four, or half the tribes found, the profits from these works would obviously be greater.  Nothing that has happened in the past makes it probable [??????] that all would fail to find.  [32] Of course, private individuals also are able to combine on this principle and pool their fortunes [???????????? ??? ?????] in order to diminish the risk [???????????].  Nevertheless there is no reason to fear [????????] that a public company formed on this plan will conflict with the interests of private persons, or be hampered by them.107 (Xenophon, 1925, sec. 4.27–32)
Here, we have an understanding of risk that is caused by human action—indeed, human action undertaken in order to remedy the damage caused by a previous collective human endeavor, the (second) Peloponnesian War.  The risk is somewhat catastrophic, though only primarily catastrophic to the poor individuals who dig but fail to find silver, the indirect effect is to perpetuate the poor economic conditions from which all Athenians were suffering.  It is also manageable through good governance, and understood as a function of probability (though the word translated as probable, ??????, means something closer to  ‘seeming’ than the modern concept of probability, which had yet to be created).  The final argument almost seems to anticipate an objection that a modern day Tea Partier might put forth.  This is, as far as I can tell, the closest the ancient world gets to a modern idea of risk.
	Still, even if this example were representative (to the contrary, it seems to be uniquely ahead of its time), the place and function of risk in the social lifeworld, in everyday discourse and in more formalized deliberative or forensic rhetorical contexts, has developed quite a bit over time.  Though noting the importance of kairos for recent events in world history—Chernobyl, German reunification, Austria’s 1914 ultimatum to Serbia—Luhmann contends that kairos is no longer the focal point of the relationship between risk and society:
The assumption that choosing the propitious moment averts risk nowadays nevertheless lost all justification… [Any] attempt to decide rationally takes time, and thus entails the risk of letting favorable opportunities go by or of missing the last chance to prevent inevitable developments. No one believes any longer that time itself designates favorable points in time.  And when the spouse of an American president seeks astrological advice, this is noted with astonishment and displeasure by all.  The choice of a propitious moment for a risk decision has itself become a risky decision.  (Luhmann, 2005, p. 151)
This change stems from a more totalizing conception of risk as the concept transitioned from a predicate of human action to an object of human action.  A risk is not something that one decides to experience or not, but rather something that must be managed.  The management (or mismanagement) of risk occurs through both action and inaction.  Risk cannot be eliminated through caution, for “the cautious man, when it is time to act suddenly, does not know how to do so and is consequently ruined; for if one could change one's nature with time and circumstances, fortune would never change” (Machiavelli, 1903, p. 101).108  This presaged the late modern view that both action and inaction entail risks, and moreover risks are largely the consequence of prior human decisions.
	In the early stages of modernity, it was assumed that with greater knowledge concerning the mastery of nature, humans could precisely control the future.  The human subject, as self-identical and self-certain, was grounded in a sort of personal confidence, and as rational and sovereign, could project that confidence into the future by acting deliberately after careful study (René Descartes, 1997). The world of early modernity had no room for chance (Hacking, 1975).
	Though determinism as fate was rejected by Machiavelli as a constraint on human agency, in the early nineteenth century this radical denial of chance developed into a return of an extreme form of determinism, posited as a fundamental feature of the universe:
All events, even those which on account of their insignificance do not seem to follow the great laws of nature, are a result of it just as necessarily as the revolutions of the sun.  In ignorance of the ties which unite such events to the entire system of the universe, they have been made to depend upon final causes or upon hazard, according as they occur and are repeated with regularity, or appear without regard to order; but these imaginary causes have gradually receded with the widening bounds of knowledge and disappear entirely before sound philosophy, which sees in them only the expression of our ignorance of the true causes...  We ought then to regard the present state of the universe as the effect of its anterior state and as the cause of the one which is to follow.  Given for one instant an intelligence which could comprehend all the forces by which nature is animated and the respective situation of the beings who compose it—an intelligence sufficiently vast to submit these data to analysis—it would embrace in the same formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the lightest atom; for it, nothing would be uncertain and the future, as the past, would be present to its eyes.  (Laplace, 1814/1902, pp. 3–4)109
This intelligence, which came to be known as Laplace's Demon, was based on the assumption in classical mechanics that all particles have a defined position and velocity.  Though humanity could never achieve the omniscience of Laplace's Demon, uncertainty could be minimized and calculated precisely through the emerging discipline of mathematics known as probability (Crombie, 1994; Daston, 1988; Gigerenzer et al., 1989; Hacking, 1975, 1990; Hald, 2005; Krüger, Daston, & Heidelberger, 1990; Prior, Glasner, & McNally, 2000).  Omniscient but not immortal, Laplace's Demon was led to its doom by the developments of thermodynamics in the nineteenth century and quantum mechanics in the twentieth century (Ulanowicz, 1986).  
	With Werner Heisenberg's famous uncertainty principle, uncertainty moved from the realm of epistemology to ontology, as imprecision (ungenauigkeit) was built into the very fabric of the universe.  In this, the science of probability was strengthened, as what was once merely calculated ignorance joined what medieval philosophers had called the praedicamenta, i.e., Aristotle's categories of being.  This transition produced some conceptual confusion that is a source of miscommunication in the debate about psychosis risk syndrome.  Is the diagnosis epistemic, a prediction of future pathology, or is it metaphysical, a pathological state characterized by its potential to progress to psychosis?  I shall take up this question shortly; for now, it is enough to observe that the answer depends on the extent to which the events of the future are thought to be preordained.
Psychiatric Rhetoric in a Risk Society
	With this background, I now turn to risk in late modernity, and the rhetorical climate in which the concepts of dementia praecox, schizophrenia, and psychosis emerged and developed.  The concept of dementia praecox was born during the nineteenth century within a risk climate that was focused on degeneracy.  It then developed into schizophrenia during the epoch of mental hygiene and eugenics, and adopted its modern form during the era of preventive medicine.  The rhetoric of risk during these periods profoundly influenced the development of the concept.
	The grandiosity of early modern science was radical, but its expression was an echo of antiquity, which gave way as modernity matured.  The idea of “providential reason,” according to which increasing human knowledge enhances and safeguards the human experience,
carries residues of conceptions of fate deriving from pre-modern eras.  Notions of fate may of course have a sombre cast, but they always imply that a course of events is in some way preordained...  To accept risk as risk, an orientation which is more or less forced on us by the abstract systems of modernity, is to acknowledge that no aspects of our activities follow a predestined course, and all are open to contingent happenings.  In this sense it is quite accurate to characterise modernity, as Ulrich Beck does, as a 'risk society,' a phrase which refers to more than just the fact that modern social life introduces new forms of danger which humanity has to face.  Living in the 'risk society' means living with a calculative attitude to the open possibilities of action, positive and negative, with which, as individuals and globally, we are confronted in a continuous way in our contemporary social existence. (Giddens, 1991, p. 28)
The emergence of this late modern risk society is closely tied to developments in the practice of medicine (especially psychiatry), and the shifting meaning over the last 150 years of risk, from dangerous predisposition within an individual subject to a probabilistic risk factor within a population.  The concept of 'risk' in classical psychiatry referred to “the danger embodied in the mentally ill person capable of violent and unpredictable action,” a danger that implies “at once the affirmation of a quality immanent to the subject (he or she is dangerous), and a mere probability, a quantum of uncertainty, given that the proof of danger can only be provided for after the fact” (Castel, 1991, p. 283).  
Risks of Modernity: Degeneracy and the Rise of Hygiene
	The concept of predisposition that emerged in the late eighteenth century referred to “an inherited taint or flaw that would, in the right (or wrong) circumstances, manifest itself in illness or pathology,” and became especially popular in the psychiatric imaginary by the mid-nineteenth century, when “all manner of problems of social pathology and danger became understood in terms of degeneracy” (N. S. Rose, 2007, pp. 18–19).  A predisposition to insanity was a latent material dangerousness subsisting in the body, and during the first half of the nineteenth century, preventive psychiatry entailed such drastic measures as confinement and/or sterilization on the grounds of public safety, for “all insane persons, even those who appear calm, carry a threat, but one whose realization still remains a matter of chance” (Castel, 1991, p. 283).  
	Eventually facing practical limitations on their ability to confine the dangerous, during the second half of the nineteenth century, psychiatrists shifted their preventive efforts toward the promotion of 'mental hygiene,' defined as
...the art of preserving the mind against all incidents and influences calculated to deteriorate its qualities, impair its energies, or derange its movements. The management of the bodily powers in regard to exercise, rest, food, clothing and climate, the laws of breeding, the government of the passions, the sympathy with current emotions and opinions, the discipline of the intellect—all these come within the province of mental hygiene. (Rossi, 1962, p. 78)
The physician who coined the phrase 'mental hygiene,' William Sweetser, invoked the theological notions of predestination and sin to explain the emerging understanding of the heritability of mental illness:
Can we, therefore, escape the conclusion that we may be physically predisposed, I had almost said predestined, to happiness or misery? Such, in fact, is implied in the familiar expressions of happy and unhappy constitution or temperament.  As, moreover, these vicious constitutions are oftentimes inherited, and must, probably, in the first instance, have grown out of infringements of the organic laws, it becomes a literal truth, that the sins of the parents may be visited on their unoffending children, even to remote generations. (Sweetser, 1850, p. 120 my emphasis)
By this sort of rhetoric, moral degeneracy was converted into a biological phenomenon, though the understanding of heritability was not quite Darwinian. Bénédict Morel, a prominent French psychiatrist who trained under Jean-Pierre Falret (Esquirol's successor) as chief resident at the Salpêtrière Hospital and who in 1857 penned a Treatise on the physical, intellectual, and moral degeneracy of the human race,110 claimed that degeneracy was caused by things like poor nutrition, chronic diseases like tuberculosis or goiter, the consumption of intoxicants such as absinthe or tobacco, and masturbation along with other sexually deviant behaviors (Dowbiggin, 1991; Morel, 1860).  Furthermore, he contended that this degeneracy becomes amplified in families as it was passed down through multiple generations, so that, for example, alcoholic parents might produce epileptic children, neurasthenic or hysterical grandchildren, and criminally insane or congenitally idiotic (and probably sterile) great-grandchildren (Dowbiggin, 2004).  
	Morel was the first to argue that mental disorders should be classified by (presumed) etiological rather than phenomenological factors, and proposed that many of the separate disorders identified by Pinel and Esquirol be grouped together into a single nosological category he called hereditary madness (Dowbiggin, 2004).  Morel believed that hereditary madness was one aspect of the larger phenomenon of degeneracy, which was also manifested in physical deformities (a point which he established in part by describing the “facial stigmata” of children who most likely were born with what would later come to be known as Down Syndrome) (Carlson, 2001, p. 41).  As I mentioned in the previous chapter, Morel coined the term démence précoce—which became Kraepelin's dementia praecox and then Bleuler's schizophrenia—to describe the state he believed was “in many cases, the catastrophic end of hereditary madness.”  He continues:
A sudden immobilization of all the faculties, a precocious dementia [démence précoce], indicates that the young patient has reached the end of the intellectual life at his disposal.  He is at that point referred to as imbecile or idiot.  These sad representatives of degeneration in humanity constitute the fourth class of our hereditary madness.111 (Morel, 1860, p. 566; my translation, emphasis in the original)
Although it is unclear whether Morel's understanding of degeneration was the source or result, the association of social, physical, and mental degeneracy reflected imagery in the nineteenth century popular imaginary.  
	What was the source of this degeneration that could be found in abundance everywhere one looked?  In the popular imaginary, degeneracy was sometimes understood geographically as related to urbanization.  The process of moving into cities from villages was thought to in some manner damage “the constitution of the immigrants, the weakly offspring they gave birth to, and the further deterioration of those offspring as they were afflicted by all manner of pathologies” (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 19).  This easily lent itself to popular negative representations of social classes.  Honoré de Balzac, for example, described lower class politically radical Parisians in 1835 as “a people fearful to behold, gaunt, yellow, tawny... men whose twisted and contorted faces give out at every pore the instinct, the desire, the poisons with which their brains are pregnant; ...its cadaverous physiognomy... has but two ages—youth and decay” (Balzac, 2010, para. 1).  The Parisian bourgeoisie did not fare much better in Balzac's account, in which his description of their occupational psychosis bears a striking resemblance to Morel's clinical description of the arrested development of démence précoce:
They appear to be skeptics and are in reality simpletons; they swamp their wits in interminable arguments.  Almost all conveniently adopt social, literary, or political prejudices, to do away with the need of having opinions... Having started early to become men of note, they turn into mediocrities, and crawl over the high places of the world.  So, too, their faces present the harsh pallor, the deceitful coloring, those dull, tarnished eyes, and garrulous, sensual mouths, in which the observer recognizes the symptoms of the degeneracy of the thought and its rotation in the circle of a special idea which destroys the creative faculties of the brain. (Balzac, 2010, para. 10; my emphasis)
With scientists and publics expressing concerns about an epidemic of degeneracy getting ever worse with each generation and potentially threatening the national stock, the eugenics movement was not far off, and “the idea of degeneracy would be central to the biopolitics of the first half of the twentieth century” (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 19). Given that the concepts of psychosis and schizophrenia were developing during this period, they were profoundly affected by concerns for managing the risk of degeneracy.
	The idea of degeneracy is depressing, of course, but the discourses in which it is advanced are not exclusively pessimistic.  There are rhetorical motives at work, as always.  Within a traditionalist/conservative ideological milieu, the whole world is plunging into madness:
One must take into account the deep psychic anxiety, the extraordinary prevalence of neurosis, which make our age unique.  The typical modern has the look of the hunted.  He senses that we have lost our grip upon reality.  This, in turn, produces disintegration, and disintegration leaves impossible that kind of reasonable prediction by which men [sic], in eras of sanity, are able to order their lives.  And the fear accompanying it unlooses the great disorganizing force of hatred, so that states are threatened and wars ensue. (Weaver, 1948, p. 16)  
The proposed solution often “depends upon recovery of the 'ceremony of innocence,' of that clearness of vision and knowledge of form which enable us to sense what is alien or destructive, which does not comport with our moral ambition” (p. 11).  The situation is no more pleasant from the left.  In a speech published in the Pravda on May 24, 1959, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev argued:
Can there be diseases, nervous disorders among certain people in a Communist society? Evidently yes. If that is so, then there will also be offenses, which are characteristic of people with abnormal minds. Of those who might start calling for opposition to Communism on this basis, we can say that clearly their mental state is not normal. (cited in Tomov, Voren, Keukens, & Puras, 2007, p. 402)
As we will see very soon, this line of thinking in the Soviet Union did not end well.  In either case, there is a solution that will root out and eliminate all those terrible defilers of our fair society, but we must have the ability to detect the aliens and traitors in our midst, and the  'moral clarity,' as some (almost always ironically) say, to be utterly ruthless in our treatment of them.  In this, a restoration of the moral order that has been defiled by progressives/reactionaries (depending on one's persuasion), there is hope.  The pattern involved is that of “descent-ascent,” which “reflects a recurrent rhythm of life and, for humans, a form of consciousness, a form in which human experience is often symbolized and made meaningful.  Put differently, the descent-ascent pattern is akin to an archetypal metaphor” (Lake, 1984, p. 426).
	In the previous three chapters, I examined the development of the concepts of psychosis and neurosis within the context of the discourses of medical science.  The cyclic inversion of meaning, with ‘(actual) neurosis’ taking on the meaning formerly signified by ‘psychosis,’ followed by inversion again, testifies to the fluidity of these concepts at this stage and the tensions between rhetorical continuity and discontinuity.  The discourses of hygiene and degeneracy also influenced the longitudinal course of these signifiers, as can be seen in Freud's writings. With science, there is always a hope that any degeneration can be halted or reversed, and this feeling out of terminology was in part a rhetorical contest over which group of patients constituted the lost causes, or, worse, the intrinsically dangerous.
	At first, Freud's primary concern was in preventing the 'actual neuroses' (by which he means psychoses, as opposed to the psychoneuroses).  This entailed, of course, stopping the dangerous practices of masturbation and coitus interruptus, which he believed wrecked their havoc by physically degenerating the onanists' nerves:
[Actual] neuroses [i.e., psychoses] are entirely preventable as well as entirely incurable.  The physician’s task is wholly shifted on to prophylaxis.  The first part of this task, the prevention of the sexual noxa of the first period, coincides with prophylaxis against syphilis and gonorrhea, since they are the noxae which threaten anyone who gives up masturbation.  The only alternative would be free sexual intercourse between young men and respectable girls; but this could only be adopted if there were innocuous methods of preventing conception. (Freud, 1893b, p. 60)
Here it would appear that the widespread availability of oral contraceptives was one of the greatest psychiatric advances of the twentieth century. With respect to the ‘actual neuroses,’ we see in this remark a particular kind of medical appeal that appears when a disease-object is both preventable and difficult to treat, and which we will see again and again once the era of preventive medicine truly begins.  Importantly, Freud considers these phenomena serious social problems, pathologies of an entire class or population, rather than of individuals:
In the absence of such a solution [i.e., innocuous contraception], society appears doomed to fall a victim to incurable neuroses, which reduce the enjoyment of life to a minimum, destroy the marriage relation and bring hereditary ruin on the whole coming generation.  The lower strata of society know nothing of Malthusianism, but they are in full pursuit, and in the course of things will reach the same point and fall victim to the same fatality.  (Freud, 1893b, p. 60, my emphasis)
The sense of determinism in this fatalistic rhetoric is pronounced, and the notion of Lamarckian inheritance is fairly typical of the discourses of degeneracy.  The association between preventive medicine, populations, and quasi-apocalyptic language is a key cluster that will appear again and again.
	The “hygienist” and eugenics movements were both biopolitical projects concerned with regulating risks posed to populations by dangerous degeneracy within individuals (Donzelot, 1979, p. 55).  The brutal totalitarian regimes that emerged in the twentieth century developed programs of political oppression that united the politics of death with the politics of life.  To these, one might also add philanthropy, which also “sought a prophylactic mode of action, endeavoring to promote certain kinds of moral conduct by coupling the provision of financial aid with conditions as to the future conduct of recipients,” thereby stemming the tide of degeneracy (N. S. Rose, 1989, p. 129).  What these all have in common is the idea that a hidden element can lie within an individual body, and be passed down from parent to child, that could pose a danger to society and that should be managed through a process of classification, identification, and some form of coercion – in short, biopolitically.  
Risk and Latent Danger
	In his original formulation of the disorder, drawing upon the ideas of Morel, Bleuler (1911a) described a variant of schizophrenia that was hidden and latent in its development, which he believed was the most frequent form of schizophrenia:
There is also a latent schizophrenia, and I am convinced that this is the most frequent form, although admittedly these people hardly ever come for treatment... In this form, we can see in nuce all the symptoms and all the combinations of symptoms which are present in the manifest types of the disease.  Irritable, odd, moody, withdrawn, exaggeratedly punctual people arouse, among other things, the suspicion of being schizophrenic.  Often one discovers a concealed catatonic or paranoid symptom and exacerbations occurring in later life demonstrate that every form of this disease may take a latent course.  (p. 239)
For some (e.g., Gaupp, 1938), this was understood as a kind of psychotic disorder with a lengthy prodromal phase, in which the patient is remarkably lucid all the while an insidious endogenous pathology developed that could, at any moment, activate.  The course of schizophrenia was understood as a degenerating (splitting) mind, but the seeds of this degeneration were thought to be latent in these cases.  Bleuler's pathological concept of 'latent schizophrenia' developed under several names: 'abortive schizophrenia' (Mayer, 1951), 'ambulatory schizophrenia' (Zilboorg, 1941), 'borderline schizophrenia' (Knight, 1954), 'chronic incipient schizophrenia' (Mace, Koff, Chelnek, & Garfield, 1949), 'pseudoneurotic schizophrenia' (Hoch & Polatin, 1949), 'pseudopsychopathic schizophrenia' (Hoch, 1950), and, with a hint of mockery, 'salon schizophrenia,' which stands in contrast “to the honest-to-goodness state hospital” form of the illness (Bellak, 1955, p. 63).112
	Writing thirteen years later, Bleuler seems ambivalent about whether latent schizophrenia constituted a disease entity, placing the word disease in scare-quotes (possibly to distinguish between the putative disease entity and its observable expression) and noting that the characteristics of latent schizophrenia (i.e., that it is frequently basically asymptomatic) were such that they enabled the affected patients to masquerade as “normal” individuals:
Latent schizophrenias are very common under all conditions so that the “disease” schizophrenia has to be a much more extensive term than the pronounced psychosis of the same name.  This is important for studies of heredity.  At what stage of anomaly any one should be designated as only a “schizoid” psychopathic, or as a schizophrenic mentally diseased, cannot at all be decided as yet.  At all events, the name latent schizophrenia will always make one think of a morbid psychopathic state, in which the schizoid peculiarities are within normal limits. (Bleuler, 1924, p. 437)
The emphasis on heredity here, as well as the idea of a premorbid state, turn out to be rather prescient with respect to psychosis risk syndrome.  
	DSM-II contained a diagnosis of “schizophrenia, latent type,” for “patients having clear symptoms of schizophrenia but no history of a psychotic schizophrenic episode.  Disorders sometimes designated as incipient, pre-psychotic, pseudoneurotic, pseudo-psychopathic, or borderline schizophrenia are categorized here” (American Psychiatric Association, 1968, p. 34).  This category was not included in DSM-III.
	In these different developing pathways of the original concept of latent schizophrenia, we can see the roots of several later diagnostic categories.  The 'schizoid peculiarities' to which Bleuler referred in his description of latent schizophrenia came to characterize schizoid personality disorder, which is predicated of individuals who are extreme loners with no desire for social activities, friendships, or sexual partners, and who are indifferent to praise or blame (Magnavita, 1990; Shedler & Westen, 2004).  Similarly, 'borderline schizophrenia' eventually became borderline personality disorder, which is characterized by unregulated affect, cognition, and behavior, unstable interpersonal relationships (with patterns of idealization and devaluation), and extreme sensitivity to abandonment, whether real or perceived (Brask, 1959; National Institute of Mental Health, 2014).
	As borderline schizophrenia was initially conceived, it was closest to what is now known as schizotypal personality disorder, “a pattern of acute discomfort in close relationships, cognitive or perceptual disturbances, and eccentricities of behavior” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 645).  The term schizotype was coined in 1953 by Sandor Rado:
For psychodynamic purposes I shall abbreviate the term schizophrenic phenotype to schizotype.  Can we diagnose the patient's inherited predisposition before he develops an open psychosis or even if he never develops an open psychosis?  In other words, are we prepared to view him as a schizotype from birth to death, or only during his open psychosis? ...[When] we subject these gross manifestations of the open psychosis to minute psychodynamic analysis, we discover an underlying ensemble of psychodynamic traits which... is demonstrable in the patient during his whole life.  This finding will define him as a schizotype from birth to death, and will allow us to view his life history as a sequence of schizotypal changes. (Rado, 1953, p. 410)
Though clearly the meaning of schizotypal has drifted somewhat, its relationship to psychosis risk has been constant and will be discussed below.
Medicalization and Criminalization
	While western psychiatry generally sought to distance Bleuler's latent schizophrenia from the more visible and acute variety, as can be seen in the development of these personality disorder concepts, the course of latent schizophrenia in the Soviet Union took a rather insidious turn.  
Sluggish Schizophrenia
	Though remarkably absent from the contemporary debate about psychosis risk syndrome and the risks posed by this diagnosis, a diagnosis of Russian providence known as 'sluggish schizophrenia' provides another view of schizophrenia as a (political) risk syndrome (Smulevich, 1989; Wilkinson, 1986).  Six years after Bleuler converted dementia praecox into schizophrenia, the Bolsheviks dismantled the provisional government in Petrograd and launched the Russian Civil War.  Russian psychiatrists were one of the earliest professional groups that threw their support behind the Bolsheviks, and consequently, several psychiatrists managed to acquire prominent positions in the new government at the conclusion of the war in 1922 (Lavretsky, 1998).  
	These psychiatrists were the progenitors of what came to be known as the 'Moscow School' of psychiatry, which exerted immense influence on the field in the Soviet world (psychiatrists with heterodox 'anti-Pavlovian' views risked being sent to the Gulag) and became close partners with the governing state regime (J. V. Brown, 1994; Popov & Lichko, 1991).  At a pivotal moment, psychiatrists conducting research in neuropsychiatry were ironically labeled 'anti-materialist' and reactionary, were made to confess and had their laboratories shut down, and in some cases were tortured after the infamous October 1951 'Joint Session' (or 'Pavlovian Session') of the Academy of Medical Sciences of the USSR and the All-Union Neurologic and Psychiatric Association  (Windholz, 1997).  The older generation of psychiatrists having been liquidated, the inquisitors of the Joint Session, chief among them Andrei Snezhnevsky, took control of the Moscow School.
	The nosological approach of the Moscow School was to combine dimensional and categorical diagnostic entities into a unitary framework, not unlike the approach taken by DSM-5, though for entirely different reasons  (Snezhnevsky, 1968).  Central to the nosology was Snezhnevsky's concept of 'sluggish schizophrenia,' a diagnostic entity that “lends itself more than conveniently to a view of dissent as a kind of illness” (Bloch & Reddaway, 1985, p. 160).  Sluggish schizophrenia was characterized by a very slowly progressing course, although the prognosis was just as bad as the more rapid 'malignant' form of the disease (Lavretsky, 1998).  In a way, this was the logical culmination of Kraepelin's decision to define dementia praecox based on its course over time; Kendell (1975) politely noted that “Russian psychiatrists appear to be influenced more by the course of the illness and less by its actual symptomatology... which has some bearing on recent political controversies” (p. 80).  Comments like Kendell's led Szasz to complain that “the concepts and methods of the Russian psychiatric gangsters who perpetrate [abuses] are legitimized and supported by their colleagues in the West” (Szasz, 1976, p. 101).  Despite the Soviet rejection of genetics as capitalist biology under Lysenko, Snezhnevsky advanced the thesis that schizophrenia was a “biological disorder with a genetic etiology,” which provided support for the hospitalization of dissidents and their family members (A. A. Stone, 2002, p. 110).  
	The political nature of the diagnosis of sluggish schizophrenia was readily apparent from its signs and symptoms, and it fit in well with state propaganda.  Many believed that sluggish schizophrenia was invented on the orders of the KGB, although many Soviet psychiatrists apparently lacked insight into its political character when they made their diagnoses:
[According] to Snezhnevsky and his colleagues, patients with this diagnosis were able to function almost normally in the social sense. Their symptoms could resemble those of a neurosis or could take on a paranoid quality. The patient with paranoid symptoms retained some insight in his condition but overvalued his own importance and might exhibit grandiose ideas of reforming society. Thus, symptoms of sluggish schizophrenia could be “reform delusions,” “struggle for the truth,” and “perseverance.”  While most experts agree that the core group of psychiatrists who developed this concept did so on the orders of the party and the Soviet secret service KGB... and knew very well what they were doing, for many Soviet psychiatrists this seemed a very logical explanation because they could not explain to themselves otherwise why somebody would be willing to give up his career, family, and happiness for an idea or conviction that was so different from what most people believed or forced themselves to believe. (Voren, 2010, pp. 33–34)
These “reform delusions” were diagnosed whenever a patient “develops a new principle of human knowledge, drafts an academy of human happiness, and many other projects for the benefit of mankind” (Styazhkin, 1991, p. 122).  
	Snezhnevsky's emphasis on the “negative axis” of psychotic symptoms is an important theoretical innovation (although the idea of negative symptoms preceded him) that has been embraced in the West and is featured prominently in the DSM.  For Snezhnevsky, this axis, which included “conflict with authorities, poor social adaptation, and pessimism,” was developed to justify a diagnosis made in the absence of the more dramatic positive symptoms of frank psychosis (Ougrin, Gluzman, & Dratcu, 2006, p. 458).  The distinction between negative and positive psychotic symptoms is grounded in a humoral way of thinking, as symptoms
that suggest a surplus or exaggeration of normal functioning, such as delusions, hallucinations, and ideas of reference, are usually referred to as positive symptoms, and those that refer to interpersonal and motivational deficits are often referred to as negative symptoms.  (Millon, Millon, Meagher, Grossman, & Ramnath, 2012, p. 404)
Modern psychiatrists increasingly focus on the so-called negative symptoms, like catatonia, flattened affect, asociality, alogia (highly restricted or absent speech), anhedonia (lack of the ability to feel pleasure), and avolition (lack of motivation), as anti-psychotic medications (especially the older typical anti-psychotics) tend to be more effective against the positive symptoms while leaving the negative symptoms insufficiently treated in many cases; the newer atypical class of antipsychotics as a whole tends to perform better on these symptoms (R. J. Leo & Regno, 2000).  For those who show only positive psychotic symptoms, Hacking (1998) has argued that the diagnosis of multiple personality disorder has taken the role formerly taken by schizophrenia before the idea of the importance of the negative axis of symptoms became taken for granted.  Schizophreniform disorder 'with good prognostic features,' which will be discussed shortly, also represents schizophrenia (in an early stage) without negative psychotic symptoms (the absence of which is an indicator of a good prognosis).  In any event, it seems clear that the diagnosis of sluggish schizophrenia was a brazen political abuse of psychiatry (and it must be noted that it is still in use in Russia today and in some Latin American countries formerly within the Soviet sphere of influence).  
	But it is also clear that the concept in its historical arc of development (beginning as dementia praecox) was well suited to this sort of expansive interpretation.  Further, it reveals a certain kind of risk – social dangerousness – that was thought (and is thought) to inhere in individuals who at some later point might manifest clear symptoms of psychosis.  To some extent, the problem relates to a more general nosological issue:
[The] emotive use of language so sways the intellect that phrases suggesting the 'real' existence of diseases as single objects of perceptions lead doctors to think as if these diseases were to be kept away by barbed-wire entanglements, or 'stamped out' by physical agencies ruthlessly employed. (Crookshank, 1923, p. 345)
This seems especially true with risk syndromes that signify possibly dangerous individuals; morbid descriptors like 'insidious' and 'latent' make it easy to not just reify but personify an abstraction, and then draw moral inferences about the person to whom the diagnosis applies.
	This was not uniquely a Russian phenomenon.  Jonathan Metzl shows how similar concerns were used in the United States, especially during the deinstitutionalization period, with a none-too-subtle racial animus:
Many [individuals who were involuntarily committed] were sent to Ionia [State Hospital, in Michigan] after convictions for crimes that ranged from homicide to armed robbery to property destruction during periods of civil unrest, such as the Detroit riots of 1968... [Ward] notes emphasized how hallucinations and delusions rendered these men as threats not only to other patients, but to the authority represented by clinicians, ward attendants, and society itself.  “Paranoid against his doctors and the police.”  Or, “would be a danger to society were he not in an institution.”  Ionia held these men using little-known loopholes in deinstitutionalization amendments that stipulated that the hospital would continue to receive or contain patients... who posed “dangerousness to the community” even after most other patients were set free.  The word NEGRO appeared on the upper right corner of the face page in eight out of every ten of these charts.  And schizophrenia, paranoid type was overwhelmingly the most common diagnosis applied to these men, these institutionalized black bodies that deinstitutionalization left behind. (Metzl, 2009, p. 14, emphasis in the original)
This resonates with contemporary concerns, frequently given voice after school shootings and similar tragedies involving firearms, about the dangers of failing to restrain in advance those who show signs of mental illness.  	Further, the association between people with schizophrenia and acts of political violence or sabotage can be seen in advertisements for formulations of antipsychotic medication that have been designed to be difficult for patients to resist them.  In an advertisement for an injectable formulation of chlorpromazine (Thorazine), non-compliant patients are depicted as saboteurs, though nonetheless deserving of help (Figure 4.2).  These “mental patients who fear or resent medication” sabotage their own treatment, the progress of their fellow patients “by spreading fears and multiplying conflicts on the hospital ward,” and the bottom line of the hospital by “[throwing] away thousands of dollars of drugs each year.”  In a similar vein, a two-page advertisement in the Archives of General Psychiatry for the non-phenothiazine butyrophenone derivative antipsychotic haloperidol (Haldol) features a drawing of a threatening looking character on the left page with the caption “Assaultive and belligerent?”  On the right page, the reader is told that “Cooperation often begins with Haldol,” which “acts promptly to control aggressive, assaultive behavior”  (Figure 4.3).  Another advertisement for Haldol, formulated as a “tasteless and undetectable” but “potent” liquid that can be added surreptitiously to a patient's food, features a similar message: that the drug can be used to “gain patient cooperation” while “reducing the disruption of ward life often associated with coercive modes of administration” (Figure 4.4).  These messages all have in common the idea that a patient with psychosis is physically dangerous and presents the ever-lurking, hidden risk of noncompliance, all problems that can be dealt with pharmacologically.
	

Source: Advertisement in Hospital & Community Psychiatry (Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories, 1965).

Source: Advertisement in Archives of General Psychiatry (McNeil Laboratories, 1974).

Source: Advertisement in Health & Community Psychiatry (McNeil Laboratories, 1968).
	Schizophrenia has always been a risk syndrome.  Controlling the hidden threats posed by the afflicted, and identifying in them in the early stages of the illness (or predicting its later appearance, depending on what view of the illness one takes, a topic I shall turn to in the next major section), has always been a project of risk management, or to be more precise, danger management.  However, the development of effective antipsychotic medications, deinstitutionalization, and changes in public opinion have limited the extent to which psychosis is used to legitimate coercive political abuses.  Why was it necessary in the first place?  After all, a state could just criminalize certain threatening political activities.  Even in thoroughly repressive systems, some evidence and formal process of prosecution is required before a citizen is deprived of ordinary liberties, or else a legitimation crisis becomes very likely.  The diagnosis of 'sluggish schizophrenia' permitted the state to incarcerate future criminals before they committed any crime, by denying the sanity of those guilty of 'pre-crime.'  Their incarceration did not need to be legitimized by a formal judicial process.  In modernity, citizens have rights on the basis of their rationality, and the insane are by definition not rational.  Our methods of crime control—incentives, disincentives, deterrence, education, etc.—all presuppose rational actors.  Disconnected from reality, the psychotic are dangerous and society needs to be protected from such individuals.	
	Even though the diagnosis of schizophrenia (or a related psychotic disorder) is no longer, for the most part, used in this fashion, there is another area, however, in which psychiatric diagnosis is being used, with some controversy, to deny civil liberties traditionally afforded to all citizens: sexual crimes.  These kinds of crimes are considered so evil, so abnormally deviant, so unthinkable for a normal, rational citizen, that all criminals who commit one of these crimes are forever held under suspicion, even after their 'debt to society' has been paid.  People who have been found guilty of rape are more likely than the average citizen to commit another act of rape; prudence demands that we take steps to control this controllable risk.  Hence, sex offender registries and the strange paradoxes of sexual crime control, e.g.,  children who 'sext' one another are being prosecuted for distributing child pornography (Lee, Crofts, Salter, Milivojevic, & McGovern, 2013), and in some cases one can receive a larger penalty for passively viewing child pornography than for actually raping a child (Crary, 2012; Jauregui, 2014).  
	In this section, I shall discuss two proposed disorders that would have medicalized sexual crime in different ways—pedohebephilic disorder and coercive paraphilia—as well as a third proposed disorder, parental alienation syndrome, that illustrates the risks associated with developing diagnoses for the courtroom.  All three diagnoses were ultimately rejected for inclusion in DSM-5.
Pedohebephilic Disorder
	As Metzl's (2009) research shows, it is easy for certain social categories that are associated with systematic prejudice, like race, to pervert the operation of putatively objective judgment producing institutions.  One of the successes of the civil rights movement was the enactment of reforms that somewhat standardized the prison sentences given for felonies, so that someone who formerly would have received an especially light or heavy sentence would now receive one closer to the average.  One consequence of this diminished discretionary power of judges in assigning punishments is that criminals who for whatever reason seemed more likely to re-offend were given shorter prison sentences.  The solution to this problem came in the form of a shift from 'need-for-treatment' to 'dangerousness' criteria as the standard for civil commitment (Testa & West, 2010).  This led to the creation of the “sexually violent predator” (SVP)113 as a juridical object of knowledge, an individual who could be made to undergo chemical castration or else be forcibly 'treated' for his114 sexual perversions in a mental hospital after the term of his prison sentence was complete (Frances, 2013, p. 165).  Civil commitment of SVPs is  a form of preventive detention.
	A diagnosis of pedophilia, indicating a sexual preference or compulsion for prepubescent children, is one of the ways one could qualify for such treatment (Aviv, 2013).  The failed proposal either to include the diagnosis of 'hebephilia'—Glueck's (1955) name for sexual attraction toward teenagers—or to expand pedophilic disorder into a broader 'pedohebephilic disorder,' first so named by Freund, Seeley, Marshall, and Glinfort (1972), would have widened this category dramatically.  This proposal by the Paraphilias Subworkgroup was rejected by the APA Board of Trustees for reasons that remain confidential.  The leading argument against treating hebephilia as a paraphilia, according to Frances, is that it is actually 'normal' for adults (men) to feel sexually attracted to pubescent115 children:
Numerous studies have proven the obvious—such attraction is common and completely within the range of normal male lust... The advertising industry, wise to the fact that many adults remain sexually attracted to adolescents, cynically exploits their interest by displaying young-looking models in provocative clothing and poses. The assertion that sexual urges stimulated by sexy teenagers denote mental disorder violates common sense, experience, and evidence from research.  It is not a crime or a mental disorder to lust after the newly pubescent; it is human nature.  But it is a very serious crime in our society to act on these impulses, one that deserves a long prison term. (Frances, 2013, pp. 201–202)
One source of possible ambiguity in the debate over hebephilia is that the category of disorders in question concerns disordered appetites/desires, rather than disordered conduct.
	Along these lines, after reminding his audience of the historical uses of the category of paraphilic disorders to control deviant and taboo 'perversions,' Wakefield (2011) sharply criticized the proposal, calling it the “most flawed and blatantly over-pathologizing paraphilia proposal,” and suggested that the proposed diagnosis “violates the basic constraint that disorder judgments should not be determined by social disapproval. This is a case where crime and disorder are being hopelessly confused” (p 206).  In response to this kind of criticism, Ray Blanchard, the chief proponent, argued that if pedophilia is a mental disorder, it must follow that hebephilia is a mental disorder for the same reasons; any criticism of hebephilia along the lines offered by Wakefield or Frances should equally provide reason to exclude pedophilia.  Attempts to distinguish between pedophilia and hebephilia on the basis of fecundity would imply that homosexuality is paraphilic, Blanchard contended.  
	Blanchard acknowledged that the diagnosis would have serious reliability problems, but did not find this to be a very compelling argument:
But so what?  Should there exist no diagnosis for men who say they are most attracted to pubescents, who have committed repeated sexual offenses against pubescents, and who respond most strongly to laboratory stimuli depicting pubescents just because there are other men who produce less consistent findings?116 (Blanchard, 2009b, p. 332)
Furthermore, Blanchard argued that his critics missed the entire point:  Hebephilia would apply only to men who exclusively feel attraction for adolescents; that is, an adult who is attracted to teenagers as well as adults would not be regarded as a hebephile.  While Blanchard is correct that his opponents do not address this, he never explains why it is actually relevant.  Further, Blanchard relies on an alternative understanding of pedophilia than used by the DSM since DSM-III-R, which defined pedophilia in absolute rather than relative terms, as in the DSM-5 image of a pedophile as an adult who has “recurrent, intense sexually arousing fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual activity with a prepubescent child or children,” regardless of whether they do or do not have equal or greater feelings of attraction to adults (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 697).  Perhaps fittingly, his passive-aggressive and argumentative tone is reminiscent of the manner in which adolescents argue with their parents, and is rather striking for scientific discourse.  For example, he remarks that the validity of his position “should be obvious to anyone who has read our article” and comments that it was “ironic” that his opponents cited a particular finding “when our laboratory was one of the first to report this,” almost as if to declare ownership of the fact in question, the interpretation of which was not even in dispute (Blanchard, 2009, p. 332).117  
Coercive Paraphilia
	The proposed diagnosis 'paraphilic coercive disorder' or 'coercive paraphilia' would have applied to anyone who has “sought sexual stimulation from forcing sex on three or more nonconsenting persons on separate occasions” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010f).  This was not a new idea: In 1985 the DSM-III-R Workgroup proposed the diagnosis of 'paraphilic rapism,' “which was extensively criticized at the time” (Fuller, Fuller, & Blashfield, 1990; Krueger & Kaplan, 2012, p. 251).  As explained in DSM-5, a paraphilia is sexual desire that is sufficiently deviant that it can almost be thought of as a kind of arousal psychosis:
The term paraphilia denotes any intense and persistent sexual interest other than sexual interest in genital stimulation or preparatory fondling with phenotypically normal, physically mature, consenting human partners...  [The] term paraphilia may be defined as any sexual interest greater than or equal to normophilic sexual interests. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 685, emphasis in the original)
Provoking reactions that range from outrage to humor, coercive paraphilia remains highly controversial, and most of the discussion about its inclusion focused on the question of its status as a medical problem.  Debate about this diagnostic category is not so much about whether a coercive sexual orientation is 'disordered' but, rather, whether it is to be defined as a medical disorder, i.e., an illness, or as a legal disorder, i.e., a crime.  On this point, Lombroso reminds us that “the distinction between crime and madness is something constructed not by nature but by society” (2006, pp. 83–84).
	That the diagnosis seems designed as a risk management tool struck critics as too risky, in two opposing ways.  On the one hand, there are concerns about the possible use by defense attorneys presenting an insanity or diminished capacity defense (Slovenko, 2011). In criticizing the disorder, Frances noted that the “construct 'paraphilic coercion' has already contributed significantly to a grave misuse of psychiatry by the legal system in the handling of sexually violent predators,” and urged the DSM-5 Task Force to withstand the urge to “medicalize undesirable sexual behavior and thereby provide a psychiatric excuse helpful to those who are attempting to evade personal responsibility” (Frances, 2010a, pp. 3–4).  On the other hand, critics alleged that coercive paraphilia was an “[invented] diagnosis for [the] civil commitment of rapists” (Zander, 2008, p. 459).  The critics maintained that this should occur “only if the offender's dangerousness is caused by a mental disorder and is not a manifestation of simple criminality... Being dangerous is not enough, since released criminals are also potentially dangerous” (Frances & First, 2011, p. 555).  
	It appears that Frances was just as (if not more) concerned with this danger.  In Saving Normal, he argued that “we lose constitutional stability whenever we allow civil rights to be violated, even for those people we most detest” (Frances, 2013, p. 203).  So as to prevent any ambiguity, Frances and First (who headed the DSM-IV Paraphilia Workgroup) stated their opposition unequivocally:
The evaluators, prosecutors, public defenders, judges, and juries must all recognize that the act of being a rapist is almost always an aspect of simple criminality and that rapists should receive longer prison sentences, not psychiatric hospitalizations. (pp. 558-559)
At the 2010 annual conference of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law (AAPL), a group of forensic psychiatrists voted against endorsing 'paraphilic coercive disorder' by a vote of 31 to 2, citing “the dearth of scientific reliability or validity... [and] the potential for misuse by partisan advocates in the forensic arena, especially in civil commitment proceedings” (Franklin, 2011, p. 137).  
	This potential is not theoretical.  Even though the DSM-IV Paraphilia Workgroup “definitively rejected the claim that rape should be considered a mental disorder,” and, moreover, the entire section on paraphilia in DSM-IV was written “before the issue of SVP [sexually violent predator] commitment arose and was written with clinicians, not forensic proceedings, in mind,” Frances and First claim that “a misreading of the poorly worded paraphilia section allowed evaluators to form just the opposite impression,” namely, that rapists should be given the DSM-IV diagnosis of 'paraphilia, not otherwise specified (NOS)' (Frances & First, 2011, p. 556).  As he often does when criticizing fellow psychiatrists, Frances concedes that his opponents are “well meaning and honorable,” but argues that even “the best intended misuse of psychiatric diagnosis to curb risks to society is not worth the cost,” reminding his audience that “mental health professionals in other countries have been turned into state-sponsored tools in the oppression of political dissidents” (p. 560).  
	Despite this ethotic concession of good faith, the criticism employs a tragic frame in which SVP evaluators, who are either acting “naively or purposefully,” have hubristically exceeded the appropriate limits of psychiatry (p. 559).  Burke suggests that, in tragedy, hubris is the “basic sin... [surrounded] with the connotations of crime,” in “conflict with established values.”  Yet at the same time, “tragedy deals sympathetically with crime,” so that “we are made to feel that [the criminal's] offense is our offense,” and ultimately the target of criticism is “admonished... to 'resign' himself to a sense of his limitations” (Burke, 1984a, p. 39, emphasis in the original).
	Critics of coercive paraphilia did not limit themselves to the tragic frame.  In some cases, critics took to open mockery in the public sphere.  While these criticisms sometimes retained the tragic character of the criticisms presented in expert forums, the turn to the public opens up space for the comedic frame.  Both tragedy and comedy warn “against the dangers of pride,” but in comedy, the
emphasis shifts from crime to stupidity... The audience... chastened by dramatic irony... is admonished to remember that when intelligence means wisdom (in contrast with the modern tendency to look upon intelligence as merely a coefficient of power for heightening our ability to get things, be they good things or bad), it requires fear, resignation, [and] the sense of limits. (Burke, 1984a, pp. 41–42, emphasis in original).  
In other words, comedy is an especially useful frame when one is urging the exercise of practical wisdom over against expert expressions of technical rationality.  Burke suggests that comedy used in this way “must develop logical forensic causality to its highest point,” which entails “completing the process of internal organization whereby each event is deduced 'syllogistically' from the premises of the informing situation” (p. 42).  
For example, at the 2010 AAPL conference, Karen Franklin, a forensic psychologist, argued that if coercive paraphilia is a medical disorder, then apparent outbreaks should be treatable in the same manner as other contagious medical disorders:
A shocking news story out of Australia makes me think that if Coercive Paraphilic Disorder exists, it must be contagious. Not just contagious, but virulently contagious in certain all-male environments. Of the 198 students at St Paul's College at the University of Sydney, a large proportion were apparently infected with a highly contagious form of the virus. If Paraphilic Coercive Disorder makes it into the next Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, St. Paul's will be Ground Zero for the epidemic. According to an article in today's Sydney Morning Herald, men at the elite, all-male college proudly set up a pro-rape Facebook group called “Define Statutory” that promoted sexual aggression against women. But the elite students did not stop with words. They fostered an alcohol-fueled climate in which rapes were common, most sexual assaults went unreported, and women students felt so unsafe that they quit school, the story reports. Reporter Ruth Pollard documented a series of rapes and sexual assaults, including one incident in which about 30 drunk, naked men broke into a college and surrounded a young woman, touching and taunting her. The good news is that, if it's a contagious illness, there could be an immunization like the one for the H1N1 virus. So, while the DSM developers are frenetically118 creating new diagnoses, let's not forget to work on finding some cures, too. (Franklin, 2009, para. 1–5)
While the tone is mocking, the frame is one of acceptance of psychiatry, which is mistaken rather than evil.  Through the comic corrective Franklin gently reminds psychiatrists that diagnosis is not for its own sake, and that, if they are going to concern themselves with rapists as a patient class, then they should be thinking about how to 'cure' them.  
	Coercive paraphilia did not make it into DSM-5, though the definition of paraphilia (quoted above) explicitly includes a reference to non-consensual sexual acts, and a diagnosis that did make it, frotteuristic disorder, is characterized by “recurrent and intense sexual arousal from touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting person, as manifested by fantasies, urges, or behaviors,” which seems to contain coercive paraphilia within an even larger discrete disease entity concept, since it is difficult to conceive of a scenario in which one could commit rape without touching or rubbing the victim (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 691).  As with coercive paraphilic disorder, a diagnosis of frotteuristic disorder is warranted after three instances: “'recurrent' touching or rubbing against a nonconsenting individual... may, as a general rule, be interpreted as three or more victims on separate occasions” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 692).  
	In case this were not enough, two catch-all categories were included: other specified paraphilic disorder and, even more ambiguous, unspecified paraphilic disorder, for “situations in which the clinician chooses not to specify the reason” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 705).  The chapter on paraphilic disorders explicitly cautions that the “listed disorders do not exhaust the list of possible paraphilic disorders... The diagnoses of the other specified and unspecified paraphilic disorders are therefore indispensable and will be required in many cases” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 685, my emphasis).  This is all despite the fact that Frances' criticisms of coercive paraphilia appear in the context of criticizing the “inartful” wording of the DSM-IV diagnosis of paraphilia NOS, which was written at a time when “we were not aware of the consequential problems that would later arise from the fact that the section lacked the clarity and precision necessary for legal purposes,” and yet was duplicated in DSM-5 (Frances & First, 2011, p. 556).  Presumably, it would be possible to diagnose both coercive paraphilia and hebephilia (provided one does not agree with Frances' contention that hebephilia is normophilic) indirectly with either of the catch-all paraphilic disorder categories.
	What is one to conclude from this?  It appears that DSM-5 was stripped of this diagnosis by name, while the chapter on paraphilic disorders was written in such a way that a trained (or just careful) reader would see that it was still there.  Black (1992) suggests that “attitudes toward secrecy and disclosure are manifested not alone as articulated commitments, but also as rhetorical forms... [as] commonplaces with uncommon powers of implication and entailment” (pp. 52-53).  Giving a disorder a distinct, unique, and officially named status certainly enhances its visibility—to critics, to attorneys, to pharmaceutical executives.  Keeping the disorder but depriving it of its name is a way to manage and restrain the risks associated with the surplus of meaning that overflows from powerful words.  This aligns with Burke's account of the premodern concept of “word magic,” which “has its origins, paradoxically, not in a naïve belief in the power of words, but in man's first systematic distrust of words” and which “began with the sense of the ineffable” (Burke, 1969a, p. 304).  
	Providing the disorder with its name, a mantra to be recited by nefarious individuals eager to harness its power, was judged to be too dangerous; the elimination of coercive paraphilia from the official list should be thought of as desanctification.  Burke notes that “the need to 'desanctify' the world is essentially but an appreciation of the fact that all things possess power... [and] the rights of desanctification are designed to mitigate the intensity of these powers” (p. 304).  Yet the disorder was not removed, but only hidden to those on the outside in the parables of the other specified paraphilic disorder and the unspecific disorder, seemingly “so that they may be ever seeing but never perceiving, and ever hearing but never understanding” (Mark 4:12, New International Version). When the text says, as quoted above, that these two diagnoses “are therefore indispensable and will be required in many cases,” one could imagine as the next line, “Whoever has ears to hear, let them hear” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 685; Mark 4:9, New International Version).  
	The explicit rationale for listing the eight disorders is that they are “relatively common” forms of paraphilia, and that “some of them entail actions for their satisfaction that, because of their noxiousness or potential harm to others, are classed as criminal offenses” (p. 685).  The subtext seems to be that the lawyers of the world can have at these eight, but the others are for the true believers endowed with the (dia-)gnosis of 'clinical judgment,' and proper faith in the institution of psychiatry, just as Clement of Alexandria, writing at the beginning of the third century of the common era, argues in Book I of his Stromateis:
Nor is the word, given for investigation, to be committed to those who have been reared in the arts of all kinds of words, and in the power of inflated attempts at proof; whose minds are already preoccupied, and have not been previously emptied.  But whoever chooses to banquet on faith, is steadfast for the reception of the divine words, having acquired already faith as a power of judging, according to reason.  Hence ensues to him persuasion in abundance... But secret things are entrusted to speech, not to writing, as is the case with God... And we profess not to explain secret things sufficiently – far from it... Some things I purposely omit, in the exercise of a wise selection, afraid to write what I guarded against speaking: not grudging – for that were wrong – but fearing for my readers, lest they should stumble by taking them in a wrong sense; and, as the proverb says, we should be found “reaching a sword to a child.” (Clement of Alexandria, 2012, pp. 12–14, Bk. I, ch. 1)
Esoteric knowledge should be trusted least of all in the hands of those who are trained advocates but who have no genuine understanding and no orienting faith. Clement is concerned about the risks associated with the written disclosure of secret knowledge.  The Platonic distinction between speech and writing here is important.  In a written text, which is forced to speak for itself as it were, the writer of esoteric truths must anticipate how the uninitiated might interpret the text in a dangerous way.
	This accords with the argument made by Frances and First against even including the disorder in an appendix (or what became section III of DSM-5).  They suggested that, in DSM-IV, including rejected diagnoses in the appendix
seemed like a benignly obscure way to encourage future research.  If paraphilic coercive disorder were like the average rejected DSM suggestion, it would similarly make sense to park it in the appendix... This might facilitate the work of researchers and also provide some guidance to clinicians in assessing the rare rapist who does have a paraphilic pattern of sexual arousal... Including paraphilic coercive disorder in the DSM-5 appendix and suggesting it as a possible example of the proposed other specified paraphilic disorder category would confer an undeserved backdoor legal legitimacy on a disavowed psychiatric construct... We did not include any reference to paraphilic coercive disorder in DSM-IV, and it should not find its way in any form, however humble and unofficial, into DSM-5. (Frances & First, 2011, pp. 559–560, my emphasis)
By this reasoning, even including the disorder in an appendix would be akin to 'reaching a sword to a child.'  
	Perhaps due to the alleged misuse of paraphilia NOS, the first section of DSM-5 ends with a 'Cautionary Statement for Forensic Use of DSM-5,' which argues that in “most situations, the clinical diagnosis of a DSM-5 mental disorder... does not imply that an individual with such a condition meets legal criteria for the presence of a mental disorder or a specified legal standard (e.g., for competence, criminal responsibility, or disability),” and accordingly the use “of DSM-5 to assess for the presence of a mental disorder by nonclinical, nonmedical, or otherwise insufficiently trained individuals is not advised” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 25).  This draws a very careful line, as it does not say that DSM-5 cannot be used for forensic purposes, but rather that the text can be interpreted only by the authorized priestly caste of experts.  The text acquires a certain degree of scientific eloquence through its ability to balance
withholding and disbursing to the point that they beget mystery.  Enough is disclosed to license the authenticity of the rhetor, but that same disclosure signals its own fractionality, leaving the audience aware that what it has come to know is not all there is to be known. (Black, 1992, p. 95)
Mental health professionals may act as expert witnesses and offer testimony in support of the judicial relevance of a DSM-5 diagnosis, but the rhetorical force of this testimony should not be unfairly boosted by the authority of the DSM itself.  
Parental Alienation Syndrome
	One other extremely controversial disorder, also proposed by rejected, raises similar concerns.  Parental Alienation Syndrome (PAS) would have applied to a child who engages in a “campaign of denigration” against one of his or her parents with “no justification,” and is at best able to offer only “weak, frivolous, or absurd rationalizations” for the vilification, which occurs in the complete “absence of guilt [regarding his or her] cruelty to and/or exploitation of the alienated parent” (Gardner, 2001, p. 10).  Formulated in this way, PAS is conceived as a kind of psychosis.  Like coercive paraphilia, this diagnosis is much more relevant in the courtroom than in the clinic.  Accordingly, rhetorical concerns are even more relevant than scientific concerns, although in general it seems that diagnoses that appear to serve only a forensic purpose tend to have scant scientific backing (after all, justice and the good tend to resist hypothesis testing).  In the case of PAS, supposing the described phenomena actually occurs, a diagnosis of delusional disorder is available, so the inclusion of PAS would work primarily to legitimize the idea that such kinds of delusions are so common that they deserve special recognition.  
	One psychiatrist who opposed PAS's inclusion in DSM-5 is Paul Fink, a past president of the APA.  His criticism of PAS's scientific basis was explicitly framed as a rhetorical matter:
[Many] of the controversies [about what to include in DSM-5] are and will be political with proponents on each side of the issue. All of us love rhetoric that seems reasonable to the reader.  One such area is parental alienation syndrome (PAS). I am personally involved in opposing the inclusion of this bit of junk science invented by a psychiatrist in the 1980s, the late Dr. Richard A. Gardner. All of his books and most of his papers were published by his own publishing company. He protected child sexual abusers in court and was very abusive to the mothers of the children caught up in custody hearings. Many children and mothers have been hurt by this man's beliefs, but over 15 years, he developed many converts to his beliefs, including judges, lawyers, guardians at litem, and psychologists who liked the neat packaging of his ideas. In recent years, the ball has been picked up by "father's rights" groups who don't like to be interfered with when they are sexually abusing their children. This group has petitioned the DSM task force to include PAS in the publication. This is a good example of the political activity into which DSM is drawn. The task force members want to be fair to all parties, so we are now involved in putting together data around this issue to disprove it to the DSM task force. (Fink, 2010, para. 29–34, my emphasis)
By combining science and rhetoric, emotion and reason, morality and medicine, personal character and public credibility, this criticism is representative of many DSM-5-related arguments.  The legitimacy of a particular forensic tactic (i.e., expert witness impeachment) is now a medical question.  Dr. Gardner is described as an effective rhetor who has managed to persuade legal authorities to accept his “junk science” by means of the “neat packaging of his ideas.”  According to this depiction, Gardner has engaged in a form of sophistry that Plato compared to pastry baking, which he defined as
the flattery that wears the mask of medicine... [It is] a mischievous, deceptive, disgraceful... thing... that perpetrates deception by means of shaping and coloring, smoothing out and dressing up... [What] pastry making is to medicine, oratory is to justice. (Plato, 1997b, sec. 469b–469c)
The diagnosis is not problematic merely because it is 'incorrect' or 'invalid,' but because it is risky.  The risks posed by this diagnosis derive from the way it functions rhetorically, which Fink undermined by marshaling scientific data that he believed “disprove” its medical validity.  Fink viewed the DSM-5 debate as an opportunity to challenge the validity claims implied in Gardner's discourse before those claims could become unquestionable.  
Risk (Factors) and Susceptibility
	The next stage of the conceptual development of risk in late modernity turned from risks (dangers) hiding inside individuals to risks hiding inside populations, a move that was joined by the rise of advanced liberalism, according to which the biopolitics of risk entail
a variety of strategies that try to identify, treat, manage, or administer those individuals, groups, or localities where risk is seen to be high... Risk here denotes a family of ways of thinking and acting that involve calculations about probable futures in the present followed by interventions in the present in order to control that potential future. (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 70)
Recognizing the costs and inefficiencies inherent in a disease-containment model, the dominant paradigm in medicine began to shift toward health-promoting/illness-preventing strategies and techniques.  In his landmark essay “From dangerousness to risk,” Robert Castel contends that the fundamental characteristic of the new strategies of biopolitical risk management utilized in advanced industrial societies (more or less corresponding with Rose's concept of advanced liberalism) is that they “dissolve the notion of a subject or a concrete individual, and put in its place a combinatory of factors, the factors of risk” (Castel, 1991, p. 281, emphasis in the original).  These strategies also emphasize prevention, which is consonant with a set of neo-liberal values that place “a premium on individual responsibility for one's own health and well-being” (Grob & Horwitz, 2010, p. 106).
	Along with this came the modern notion of preventive psychiatry, which Castel argues was a solution to the moral and technical difficulties involved in attempting to confine or sterilize anyone who might contain a kernel of dangerousness.  The transition to preventive psychiatry was something that Morel gestured toward by focusing on frequencies and other objective measures of risk in populations, but was unable to fully realize because “he did not have at his disposal the specific techniques... with which to instrumentalize” the requirement to “act directly on the conditions liable to produce risk,” which also had been the principal failing of the eugenics movement (Castel, 1991, pp. 285–286).  The transition required that “the notion of risk is made autonomous from that of danger.  A risk does not arise from the presence of particular precise danger embodied in a concrete individual or group,” but rather the “effect of a combination of abstract factors which render more or less probable the occurrence of undesirable modes of behavior” (p. 287, emphasis in the original).
	With this conceptual shift in place, the new biopolitics of risk were ushered in with the rise of population data and increasingly sophisticated methods of statistical analysis, which drove new ways of thinking about the measurement and management of mortality, morbidity, and risk (Hacking, 1975, 1982).  Writing two years after its publication, which in large part was driven by concern over reliability (Kirk & Kutchins, 1992; Kutchins & Kirk, 1997), Hacking argued that the categories in DSM-III “are as responsible to the need to count uniformly as they are to any interest in 'correct' diagnosis... the fetishism for counting... brings with it the need for easily applied categories in terms of which to count” (Hacking, 1982, pp. 293–294).  Accordingly, the DSM serves as a biopolitical apparatus that enables individuals to be assigned to risk pools based on factors identified by probabilistic and epidemiological knowledge, which constitutes “a new mode of surveillance: that of systematic predetection... in effect [promoting] suspicion to the dignified scientific rank of a calculus of probabilities” (Castel, 1991, p. 288).  
	With this “conception of prevention,” underpinned by “a grandiose technocratic rationalizing dream of absolute control of the accidental, understood as the irruption of the unpredictable,” very little falls outside the circumference of its gaze (Castel, 1991, pp. 288–289).  The scope of the surveillance suggests that everyone, despite being “existentially healthy, [is] actually asymptomatically or pre-symptomatically ill.  Technologies of life not only seek to reveal these individual pathologies, but intervene upon them,” a consequence of which is that “new forms of life” are emerging around the idea of risk as susceptibility (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 19).  The danger in this approach is that it fosters a set of institutional logics that are constantly generating risks to manage without “a trace of reflection on the social and human cost of this new witch-hunt... [e.g.,] the iatrogenic aspects of prevention” (Castel, 1991, p. 289, emphasis in the original).  
Risk Production and Risk Society
	One very important change that has coincided with 'reflexive modernization' or the emergence of a second modernity is the emergence of risk production as the dominating logic of the systems world.  In the first stage of modernity, the mystifications of religion and privilege were dismantled by the likes of Marx and Nietzsche.  In the second stage, “the same is happening to the understanding of science and technology in the classical industrial society, as well as to the modes of existence in work, leisure, the family, and sexuality” (Beck, 1992b, p. 10).  Beck argues that the productive forces of industrialization “have lost their innocence in the reflexivity of modernization processes.  The gain in power from techno-economic 'progress' is being increasingly overshadowed by the production of risks” (pp. 12-13).  In the first stage, the logic of wealth production was a driving force in urbanization; the degeneracy that seemed (in the popular imaginary) to result was “legitimated as [a] 'latent side [effect]'” (p. 13).  
	Urbanization brought pollution, stress, dislocation of families and alteration of their structure, nutritional changes, socio-economic conditions that produced an increase in non-reproductive sexual activities and the spread of sexually transmitted diseases (including, importantly, syphilis, responsible for the 'general paresis of the insane'), etc., all of which received blame (in some cases fairly, in others unfairly) for the apparent epidemic of degeneracy and associated mental illness.  Our efforts to manage these hazards and 'side effects' of modernization give rise to second-order risks, with each intervention encompassing an increasingly wider scope.  In the beginning, social risks seem to live inside individual human beings.  The latent danger in these individuals can be medicalized and regulated through strict coercive measures, some of which are more acceptable to those tasked with enforcing them if they can be conceived as non-coercive, as in the second Haldol advertisement (Figure 4.3, supra).  This was somewhat more of an issue in totalitarian regimes, in which classical ideas about the role of sovereign authority continued to hold sway, modernized only insofar as they were revised to incorporate novel methods of disciplining subjects, than in liberal societies in which “governmentality,” that is, a focus on “maximizing the forces of the population collectively and individually,” was the field within which “the thematics of sovereignty, of discipline and of bio-power [were] all relocated” (N. S. Rose, 1999, p. 23).
	During the twentieth century, following the impulse first expressed (as far as I can tell) by Xenophon, “security against risk was socialized” (N. S. Rose, 1999, p. 158).  The old virtue of prudentia to which the individual was exhorted, for the sake of providing for his own and his family's needs, at a certain point came to involve the prudent move of contracting private insurance policies, which in turn were made compulsory and nationalized.  As the insured expand to include institutions and corporations, the social insurance perversely contributes to a 'too big to fail' kind of moral hazard, a new risk that we created as a direct consequence of our efforts to manage an old risk.
	As our knowledge expanded and expands, so too does our uncertainty, which can now be quantified and experienced with an unprecedented level of precision, thanks to recently developed theories of probability and methods of statistical analysis.  There is risk in acting and in not acting; risks in managing prior risks (or choosing not to); risks that we can predict in advance and risks that we cannot foresee (except insofar as we can predict that there might be unintended consequences about which we can only guess).  As we realize things are more complicated than we thought, impersonal risk factors lying in measurable populations rise to our attention, and the prevailing imperative is to prevent problems before they start, if possible, rather than treating them after they have come to fruition.  This led to preventive psychiatry.  But as with each preceding stage in the process of reflexive modernization, this maneuver will create entirely new risks, and the controversies that result will turn ultimately on stasis points relating to the salience, predictability, and importance of old risks compared with the new.
Early Intervention Research
	With the advent of preventive medicine, and in particular preventive psychiatry, we now have sufficient context to discuss the idea of early interventions in schizophrenia, from which the controversy about psychosis risk syndrome directly descends.  This idea has a much longer history than is evident in the contemporary controversy.  
Freud's Views on Early Diagnosis
	We have seen already that Freud was keenly interested in identifying schizophrenia as early as possible, but this was not in the interest of treatment.  The kind of damage to the nervous system that he believed precipitated psychosis was preventable (a simple matter of stopping adolescent male masturbation) but once symptoms were observable, it was already too late, if in fact the cause was schizophrenia and not a more treatable ailment like hysteria or obsessional neurosis.  Writing 20 years later, Freud displayed a different kind of concern for risk that he tied with diagnosis and which thoroughly inverts the modern understanding:
Often enough, when one sees a neurosis with hysterical or obsessional symptoms, which is not excessively marked and has not been in existence for long—just the type of case, that is, that one would regard as suitable for treatment—one has to reckon with the possibility that it may be a preliminary stage of what is known as dementia praecox (‘schizophrenia,’ in Bleuler’s terminology; ‘paraphrenia,’ as I have proposed to call it), and that sooner or later it will show a well-marked picture of that affection.  I do not agree that it is always possible to make the distinction so easily.  I am aware that there are psychiatrists who hesitate less often in their differential diagnosis, but I have become convinced that just as often they make mistakes. To make a mistake, moreover, is of far greater moment for the psycho-analyst than it is for the clinical psychiatrist, as he is called.  For the latter is not attempting to do anything that will be of use, whichever kind of case it may be.  He merely runs the risk of making a theoretical mistake, and his diagnosis is of no more than academic interest.  Where the psycho-analyst is concerned, however, if the case is unfavorable he has committed a practical error; he has been responsible for a wasted expenditure and has discredited his method of treatment.  He cannot fulfill his promise of cure if the patient is suffering not from hysteria or obsessional neurosis, but from paraphrenia, and he therefore has particularly strong motives for avoiding mistakes in diagnosis.  In an experimental treatment of a few weeks he will often observe suspicious signs which may determine him not to pursue the attempt any further.  Unfortunately I cannot assert that an attempt of this kind always enables us to arrive at a certain decision; it is only one wise precaution the more  (Freud, 1913a, pp. 364–365)
Here, the disorienting suggestion that psycho-analysis is the only psychiatric treatment that works (or that carries possible side effects) reminds us that this is a pre-pharmacological era.119  In contrast to the recent trend in psychiatry, his motivation was to avoid an early intervention, for schizophrenia was hopeless and attempting to treat it could only discredit psychoanalysis.  Hence the early diagnosis of schizophrenia was about reducing risk to the profession rather than to the patient.
	It is clear that already by this point, practitioners of psychoanalysis and their more biologically-inclined colleagues had already started to draw interdisciplinary battle lines, reflecting perhaps the “narcissism of minor differences” (Freud, 1989, p. 72).120  Risk and diagnosis are caught up together, though not in the same fashion as in psychosis risk syndrome, but Freud does understand a certain kind of untreatable/incurable psychosis to exist that follows a standard declining course.  
	Complicating the problem of differential diagnosis is that Freud’s division of the psychoneuroses is dimensional, while Bleuler's schizophrenia was very much part of a categorical nosological structure.  The adoption of a categorical nosology tends to provoke controversies about 'subthreshold' disorders:
The controversy surrounding subthreshold disorders exemplifies the way in which classification of mental disorders influences the definition of the discipline of psychiatry.  The existence of subthreshold disorders is a by-product of the use of operational criteria that define categories of mental disorders on the basis of a consensus rather than evidence... [Problems] related to subthreshold disorders are close to problems related to states that show some similarity to mental disorders but are considered different from them and therefore should not receive psychiatric treatment, such as grief reactions as well as excessive religious zeal and related behavior (e.g., self-flagellation and even crucifixion).  (Sartorius, 2011, pp. 64–65)
Given that Freud's psychodynamic nosology is non-categorical, however, a subthreshold disorder, if the concept is meaningful at all, is apparently more of an opportunity than a problem.
Diagnostic Anti-Fatalism: Schizophreniform Disorder
	Schizophrenia has always signified a fatalistic course, even before it was called schizophrenia.  This semiotic identity has been rather immune to falsification.  Sometimes psychiatrists observe cases that seem like schizophrenia, but resolve in less than half a year.  This is a phenomenon (or set of similar phenomena) now known as schizophreniform disorder, the
characteristic symptoms of [which] are identical to those of schizophrenia...  Schizophreniform disorder is distinguished by its difference in duration: the total duration of the illness, including prodromal, active, and residual phases, is at least 1 month but less than 6 months. (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 97)
Shorter still is brief psychotic disorder, which resolves in less than a month (p. 94).  It may seem odd to have a diagnostic category that has its own resolution as its distinguishing clinical sign (since this sign cannot be observed until after the expertise of a physician is no longer required), but in practice it is diagnosed provisionally until the symptoms have lasted six months, at which point the diagnosis is changed to schizophrenia: “the diagnosis should be noted as 'schizophreniform disorder (provisional)' because it is uncertain if the individual will recover from the disturbance within the 6-month period” (p. 97).  In other words, the diagnosis itself is a category designed for targeting potentially schizophrenic individuals for early intervention.  Apparently the diagnosis is accurate (i.e., a patient given the diagnosis in fact recovers within six months) about one-third of the time, while the “majority of the remaining two-thirds of individuals will eventually receive a diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder” (p. 98).121  
	Schizophreniform disorder was first so called by Gabriel Langfeldt, who wanted to distinguish those whose apparent psychotic states were precipitated by a stressful life event from those who exhibit psychosis without any apparent exogenous cause (Langfeldt, 1939).  This is the same distinction as Freud made using slightly different terms, and the core idea seems to be that etiologically endogenous illness must have a strictly biological pathogenesis, while etiologically exogenous illness must have a strictly psychological pathogenesis, and so the latter was treatable (with psychoanalysis) while the former was not, a view that changed sharply with the discovery of the antipsychotic properties of the phenothiazine compound chlorpromazine (Thorazine) in the 1950s  (Healy, 2004b).  
	This distinction repeated with depression (distinguishing 'endogenous depression' from 'reactive depression,' where the word reactive refers to a neurotic reaction of the kind described by Freud), and was rather obscure until the discovery of the first tricyclic antidepressant imipramine (Tofranil) by Kuhn (1958), who indicated it was an effective treatment for endogenous depression (Healy, 1997).  For the most part, DSM-III eliminated diagnostic terms that implied an etiological theory (though see the discussion of conversion disorder in Chapter 3), and the current consensus is that mental illnesses previously thought to be 'endogenous' are usually precipitated by stressors, and conversely, mental illnesses preceded by stressors usually have a biological pathogenesis of some sort (Keller, Neale, & Kendler, 2007; Kendler & Gardner, 2010; Kendler & Halberstadt, 2013).  Furthermore, most of the states that Langfeldt identified as schizophreniform disorder would now be diagnosed as mood disorders (P. J. Cowen et al., 2012).  But the name schizophreniform disorder remains, along with the basic idea of trying to distinguish, in cases of recent first psychosis states, those with a good prognosis from those with a bad prognosis.122
Early Intervention for Psychosis
	Frequently in recent discussions about psychosis risk syndrome in the context of DSM-5, it is asserted that research programs aimed at identifying individuals at high risk of developing psychosis began in the late 1990s.  For example:
For the past 15 years, well-intentioned research efforts have sought to identify individuals at highest risk to develop a psychotic disorder (usually based on the presence of transient or attenuated positive symptoms) and to develop effective early interventions for adolescents and young adults at risk. (Pierre, 2013, p. 115)   
Defenders of these efforts seem to use this 'fact' to emphasize the cutting-edge nature of this research; detractors similarly use the assertion to emphasize the novelty of the idea, which they contend is well-intentioned but “not ready for prime time” (Frances, 2010d, para. 14).  The suggested chronology, however, is not precisely accurate.123  
	More than 75 years ago, researchers were aware that it may be possible to diagnose schizophrenia early, and concerned themselves with questions about diagnostic criteria and early intervention strategies. Cameron suggested that
antedating the clinically recognizable symptoms there is a group of behavior changes which we refer to as non-specific...  These non-specific symptoms persist for periods ranging from weeks to years before the onset of the specific schizophrenic symptoms and were described in 83 of our 100 cases... We have tried to see in what environment the patient is during these early stages and how the various people around him during this time—his relatives and friends, his employer and his physician—react to his growing abnormality.  Finally we have considered the development of certain social trends—the growing acceptance of routing health examinations and the increasing utilization of general hospitals for psychiatric treatment—which may be of immense importance in the satisfactory detection and treatment of early schizophrenia. (D. E. Cameron, 1938, pp. 568–569, 577)
Two decades later, a study was announced in Detroit in which researchers
test[ed] and interview[ed] a group of normal children... From these tests and interviews, we shall predict which of these children will become schizophrenic... If our predictions prove to be supported, we are then in a position to do research which is aimed at the prevention of schizophrenia. (Mednick, 1960, p. 69)
Twenty years later, in May of 1980, the same year that saw publication of DSM-III, the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) sponsored a conference at the University of California, Los Angeles, entitled: “Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready?” (Goldstein, 1981, p. i).  This followed the establishment in 1979 of an 'Office of Prevention.'  Herbert Pardes, then director of NIMH, in the foreword to the proceedings from this conference, seemed to answer in the affirmative (in contrast to most of the papers given):
For more than three decades, the National Institute of Mental Health has conducted and supported a broad spectrum of research programs to add to our knowledge and understanding of schizophrenia.  A major focus of this work has involved diagnostic issues...  Research emphases... have been directed toward... studies of individuals and populations hypothesized to be at high risk for the disorder...  While the core mystery of schizophrenia continues to challenge researchers and clinicians, the incremental advances... constitute impressive overall progress  As information accumulates, so does the possibility that we can intervene earlier and more effectively, aiming at prevention of the premonitory signs of the disorder rather than at signs which indicate the disorder has taken hold.  (Pardes, 1981, p. iii)
Notice that Pierre and Pardes, writing thirty-two years apart, employ very similar language.  Also significant in this passage is the oracular rhetoric – the 'core mystery' of psychosis is still intact, but our seers are divining the 'premonitory signs' of the disorder.  Similarly, Cowen argues that like “moths attracted to a flame, our relentless quest has been to solve the riddle of profound psychological disorder... [Recent] 'advances' notwithstanding, the mysteries of extreme disorder are still not unraveled” (E. L. Cowen, 1981, p. 180).  This kind of gnostic (or should I say pro-gnostic) and esoteric mystery tradition language is less common in recent discussions on the topic.
	A variety of perspectives are expressed in the papers given at this conference, and many of them can be read as epideictic praise of and exhortation to primary prevention.  Primary prevention was defined in the following way:
(1) Identify something worth preventing, and develop reliable methods to differentiate victims from nonvictims; (2) Through epidemiological and laboratory studies, locate its most probable cause(s); (3) Mount and evaluate programs to circumvent those causes... That model has well served society's efforts to stamp out once-baffling, devastating disorders, such as smallpox, malaria, diphtheria, typhoid fever, and polio... Indeed, the very successes of the model have sustained it, won it recognition and plaudits, and helped to extend it to new domains in which, unfortunately, it may be less applicable. (E. L. Cowen, 1981, pp. 178–179)
One author suggests that there “are probably few issues of greater scientific, social, and humanitarian importance” (Holzman, 1981, p. 19).  Samuel Keith emphasized the exigence of the research by describing the “individual, familial, and clinical despair” that this “heartbreaking condition” brings about: Even thirty years after the discovery of the anti-psychotic properties of chlorpromazine, there “is no term in all of mental illness that elicits more fear, pessimism, or therapeutic nihilism than chronic schizophrenia” (Keith, 1981, p. 306).  Michael Goldstein, the first director of the then-recently christened NIMH Office of Prevention, notes that primary prevention is of particular importance for schizophrenia because “a schizophrenic episode is so disorganizing and recovery so arduous and unpredictable” (Goldstein, 1981, p. v).  
	Warnings and admonitions on the subject were also offered.  Asarnow and Asarnow (1981) remind their audience about the failures of the Mental Hygiene movement, emphasizing the “importance of deriving our attempts at preventive intervention for schizophrenia from the best available research evidence concerning the nature of the central deficits in schizophrenia” (p. 91).  One participant bemoaned the emphasis on biology at the expense of communication, arguing:
The studies of communication in families has [sic] revealed that there appear to be certain simple, fundamental properties of transactions which, when they proceed well across time, promote human growth and well-being.  When these communication properties go astray, the cost is high. (Singer, 1981, p. 173)
Another participant warned that the DSM criteria pose a fundamental barrier to effective primary prevention research, and anti-prophetically suggested that “the identification of the psychiatrist and things psychiatric with the DSM approach may be loosening” (Cromwell, 1981, pp. 119–120). Keith suggested that “we are probably doing ourselves a disservice by confining to schizophrenia the impact of the past 20 years of research in high risk,” because the true object of preventive efforts ought to have been on the psychosocial and institutional barriers that frustrate the efforts of chronically mentally ill patients to become “fully functioning members of society” (Keith, 1981, pp. 305–306).  He also noted a logical problem with the overall primary prevention research program:
[The] more closely an individual behavioral item is related to diagnosable schizophrenia, the more risk we run of creating a tautology.  Those people who have “symptoms” of incipient or impending schizophrenia can be predicted to have a very high risk indeed of developing the disorder.  The challenge to prevention programs will be in developing specific interventions to correct for maladaptive behavior patterns before the full-fledged disorder becomes manifest and to obviate the necessity for secondary prevention. (p. 307)
Finally, he admonished his colleagues to remember that “if our interventions are powerful enough to create something good, then they are powerful enough, if used inappropriately, to create something bad” (p. 309). 	
	With the exception of this last, brief point, none of the papers dwell on the issues of the unnecessary stigmatizing and medicating of 'false positive' individuals raised by current critics of psychosis risk syndrome.  Perhaps this was related to the fact that virtually all proposed interventions were psycho-social in nature, with the exception of a single paper (Friedhoff, 1981) that discussed injecting high doses of haloperidol into pregnant rats and then dissecting and measuring the brains of the newborn rats a week after they were born (but even in this paper the objective was theoretical and the author did not suggest or even gesture toward the idea that pharmaceutical intervention was appropriate for humans).  
	At this point, it is important to note that specific intervention strategies were still in their infancy, and the focus almost entirely placed on thinking about how to identify people for targeted interventions.  Preventive intervention strategies can be subdivided into three categories: universal interventions that target the general population (e.g., seat belts, general vaccinations, sanitation, etc.); selective interventions that target a subgroup at risk (e.g., mammograms for women with family history of breast cancer); and indicated interventions that target individuals who can be identified on the basis of some specific manifest sign(s) or symptom(s) that can be measured on an individual basis and suggest the very early stages of a disorder or illness (Gordon, 1983).  The line between the latter two categories is blurry, but a key dividing line is that those in the 'selective' category are for asymptomatic patients, while those in the 'indicated' category have “minimal but detectable signs or symptoms foreshadowing mental disorder, or biological markers indicating predisposition for a mental disorder” (Mrazek & Haggerty, 1994, p. 8).  This suggests that it is necessary to carefully articulate what is meant when it is suggested that someone is 'at risk' for a disorder.
Theoretical Perspective of Patrick McGorry
	One individual in particular seems to be close to the center of much of the development of research into psychosis risk during the last two decades, prolifically publishing on the subject and frequently named as its chief exponent: the Australian psychiatrist Patrick McGorry.  Before beginning his work on early interventions, McGorry published an article in which he challenged the “dominant neo-Kraepelinian paradigm” and instead offered a model of psychosis called the “loose linkage model” (McGorry, 1991, p. 43).  McGorry complained about the failure of researchers working within the constraints of the current model to elucidate the etiology or pathogenesis of schizophrenia:
With each passing year, it becomes more of a paradox that, despite exponential growth in knowledge in the neurosciences, the pathogenesis of this group of disorders remains obscure.  Nevertheless, the expectation that a breakthrough is imminent has been with us for some time and continues to build.  The rise of biotechnology certainly holds out the promise that, if such technology could be appropriately deployed, it would merely be a matter of time before the psychoses would be forced to yield up their secrets; yet there is a growing sense that it is perhaps no longer the crudeness of the research techniques which is causing the delay. (McGorry, 1991, pp. 43–44, my emphasis)
The esoteric rhetoric recalls that of Cowen (1981) a decade before, and the emphasis on the sense of discontinuity between the crude or primitive past and the advanced scientific present can also be seen in the ways in which antipsychotics were marketed in the first three decades after their discovery, as we saw in Chapter 3.
	McGorry argues that the key assumptions of the neo-Kraepelinian framework are problematic.  One assumption in particular stands out: that “clinical boundaries can be drawn reflecting specific underlying disorders of pathophysiology, and it is assumed that we already have an accurate idea of the location of these 'joints' at which nature should be carved” (McGorry, 1991, p. 45).  This observation recalls a metaphor in Plato's Phaedrus, in which Socrates discusses the use of rhetoric to account for the different kinds of madness systematically, noting that the key task is to “cut up each kind according to its species along its natural joints, and to try not to splinter each part, as a bad butcher might do... [Our speeches] placed all mental derangements into one common kind” (Plato, 1997c, sec. 265e).124  The neo-Kraepelinian model identifies the location of these 'natural joints' by looking at clusters of symptoms, which works rhetorically to persuade psychiatrists implicitly that there is a “close linkage of symptomatology with underlying disease process” (McGorry, 1991, p. 45).  This process is implicit because, as I discussed in Chapter 1, DSM-III explicitly disclaimed any connection between diagnostic categories and aetiopathological knowledge.	
	This belief guided research into vulnerability factors, as the search tried to find biological phenomena that varied more between (neo-Kraepelinian defined) groups than within groups.  McGorry suggests that this belief was reinforced by a story about the historical discovery of the etiology of neurosyphlis which he regards as mythical and factually wrong.  He further subtly suggests that the neo-Kraepelinian nosological approach to schizophrenia is itself schizophrenic, “displaying the 'splitting' tendency in classification... [which] has been termed 'splitomania'” (p. 46).  To return to the Platonic metaphor, McGorry would see this 'splitomania' as missing the 'natural joints' and producing many 'splinters.'  McGorry notes that “despite supportive research findings... [a dimensional model] has failed to displace the categorical approach in the psychoses” (p. 47).  He discusses several possible reasons, and then suggests that a hybrid categorical/dimensional model is needed.  His “loose linkage model” is based on previous theoretical work by Jaspers (1963) and Brockington and Meltzer (1983).  It posits that, due to the complex relationship between the manifest symptoms of psychosis and the underlying pathophysiology, “a close or constant linkage between symptom patterns and changes at the anatomical or physiological level is unlikely” (McGorry, 1991, p. 48).  Finally, he predicted a very poor prognosis for the concept of schizophrenia: “its days as a candidate for disease entity status and diagnostic term are numbered, and its demise is merely a matter of time” (p. 53).
 	Shortly after this theoretical work, McGorry initiated a vast research program into secondary prevention of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders at his new clinic, the Early Psychosis Prevention and Intervention Centre (EPPIC), informed by the prodrome interpretation of psychosis risk (Lincoln & McGorry, 1995; McGorry, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995).  He argued for a phase-oriented classification of psychosis rather than a prognosis-based classification, arguing that the latter is worse than useless because
iatrogenic effects of applying a diagnosis which connotes in the mind of the clinician, the relatives and the sufferer a prospect of prolonged pervasive disorder, disability and even inevitable deterioration... can be appreciated by any clinician who has witnessed the impact of this unnecessarily threatening diagnostic process on patients and families. (McGorry, 1995, p. 556)
The phase-oriented classification is still course-based to some extent, but emphasizes the dimension of staging, and can allow biological research to focus on the stage of 'early psychosis' and help to identify the psychopathological mechanisms at work during the 'critical period' that determines whether a patient is going to have prolonged psychosis or not.
	Shortly after this study, McGorry began working with Alison Yung on elucidating the nature and clinical features of the prodromal phase (Yung et al., 1996; Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004; Yung & McGorry, 1996a, 1997).  The two would continue to work together on this problem for the next two decades.  Two key research questions concerned how to define the beginning of illness (the onset of the prodromal phase), which requires an analysis of the difference between 'abnormality' and 'normality,' and how to define the point at which the prodrome ends and the “definitive disorder” begins (the onset of frank psychosis) (Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004, p. 12).  They defined eight categories of prodromal symptoms: neurotic symptoms (anger, anxiety, irritability, restlessness); mood-related symptoms (anhedonia, depression, guilt, mood swings, suicidal ideation); volitional symptoms (apathy, boredom, fatigue); cognitive symptoms (attentional/concentration problems, daydreaming, neurocognitive deficits, preoccupations, reduced abstraction, thought-blocking); physical symptoms (appetite problems, sleep disturbances, somatic complaints, weight loss); attenuated/subthreshold psychotic symptoms (changes in affect, changes in motility, changes in sense of self or others or the world, perceptual disturbances, suspiciousness); other symptoms (dissociative phenomena, interpersonal sensitivity, obsessive-compulsive phenomena); and behavioral changes (aggressive or disruptive behavior, deterioration in role-functioning, impulsivity, odd behavior, social withdrawal) (Klosterkötter, Ebel, Schultze-Lutter, & Steinmeyer, 1996, p. 149; Yung & McGorry, 1996a; Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004, p. 21).  
	McGorry and his colleagues investigated an array of different interventions, focusing predominantly on cognitive-behavior therapy (CBT), omega-3 fatty acid supplements (generally from fish oil), and, “in those who fail to respond to initial intervention with gentler therapies,” pharmacological therapy involving “broad-spectrum antipsychotics with minimal side effects, [which] ...may still have a place in delaying or preventing psychosis onset,” especially risperidone (Larson, Walker, & Compton, 2010; McGorry et al., 2009, p. 1210; Stafford, Jackson, Mayo-Wilson, Morrison, & Kendall, 2013; van der Gaag et al., 2012; Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004).  Other, less commonly used interventions include glycine treatment (Woods et al., 2013), family therapy (Bird et al., 2010), psychoeducation (Hauser & Juckel, 2012; McFarlane, Lynch, & Melton, 2012), and skills training (Kecmanovi?, 2011; F. Singh, DeJoseph, & Cadenhead, 2014).  Some of these proposals are obviously more controversial than others, and it is sometimes difficult to determine what enters into the 'clinical judgment' used to decide which intervention is most appropriate.  Nevertheless, McGorry and his colleagues did not use or endorse antipsychotic interventions unless they were warranted by the presence of some specific symptom or complaint for which antipsychotic medication would be indicated, keeping in mind also that everyone included in any of their studies was help-seeking to begin with (T. Jones, 2011; McGorry, 2011; McGorry et al., 2009).
Psychosis Risk Syndrome and DSM-5
	In 2009, the Psychotic Disorders Work Group recommended the diagnosis of ‘psychosis risk syndrome’ for inclusion in DSM-5.  This set off a firestorm of controversy.  Before the disorder was proposed for inclusion, the hypothetical diagnostic category was largely uncontroversial: Research still needed to be done, but just about everyone who was concerned enough to publish on the subject seemed to be in favor of the idea of early interventions, simply because the overriding sentiment across various nosological paradigms was that disability accumulates as psychotic disorders progress, creating a ceiling on the quality of the eventual recovery.  In other words, it is generally conceded by virtually all controversy partners that in the progression of psychotic disorders, the earlier one is treated, the better chance they have a meaningful recovery, while, when a psychotic disorder progresses long enough without treatment, they will reach a point where recovery probably is impossible.  The proposal to include psychosis risk syndrome as an official diagnostic entity in DSM-5, however, changed everything, perhaps provoking more controversy than any other proposed diagnosis.  This is in spite of the fact that there is a consensus about the key technical aspects of the controversy, i.e., how accurately we can predict future psychosis and how effectively we can prevent psychosis through intervention.  
Psychosis Risk Syndrome Formalized
	As conceptualized by the Psychotic Disorders Work Group, psychosis risk syndrome is “a condition with recent onset of modest, psychotic-like symptoms and clinically relevant distress and disability” (American Psychiatric Association, 2012c, para. 2).  A patient so diagnosed is not frankly psychotic: Though some psychotic symptoms may be present in milder form, they would be recognized as such because the patient's capacity for reality testing would be relatively intact (Paris, 2013b).  
	The official DSM-5 diagnostic features of this “not officially recognized” disorder lend themselves to two parallel readings due to inherently ambiguous linguistic choices.  On one hand, one could see the description of a very disturbed individual whose connection with reality becomes increasingly tenuous by the day; on the other hand, one could just as plausibly read the description as the typical weirdness of “mid-to-late adolescence or early adulthood,” the syndrome's usual age of onset.  The patient, and/or his or her family and friends, have noticed “changes in experiences and behaviors... suggesting a change in mental state.”  These changes can take a few forms.  Regardless of the specific symptoms experienced, the patient “maintains reasonable insight into the psychotic-like experiences and generally appreciates that altered perceptions are not real” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, pp. 784–786).
	The first general category of psychotic-like symptoms that the patient may have are “attenuated delusions,” which differ from true delusions (fixed beliefs that are maintained in spite of overwhelming evidence to the contrary) in that “reality testing and perspective can be elicited with nonconfirming evidence.”  For example, the patient may have a “propensity for viewing the world as hostile and dangerous,” or might “[harbor] notions of being gifted, influential, or special,” perhaps resulting in “unrealistic plans and investments,” though the individual can be made to express skepticism about these attenuated delusions with “persistent questioning.”  Second, the patient might have “attenuated hallucinations,” possibly seeing some phantom movement or false shadow in his or her peripheral vision, or perhaps hearing some faint murmuring or rumbling, which the patient regards as “unusual or puzzling,” but which is not experienced with the full force of normal perceptions and is not believed to be real (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, pp. 783–784).  
	The third psychotic-like symptom variant is an attenuated version of the “disorganized communication” of psychosis.  The 'disconnection from reality' involved in this symptom differs from that in the first two, as they constitute a disconnection from objective reality, while disorganized communication constitutes a disconnection from intersubjective reality.  In acute schizophrenia, disorganized communication may manifest as catatonic non-responsiveness, or grossly illogical or incomprehensible speech that is completely disconnected from attempts at conversation.  For example, Kraepelin (1917) described a patient who
when asked where he is, responds with “You want to know that too; I tell you who is being measured and is measured and shall be measured.  I know all that, and could tell you, but I do not want to.”  When asked his name, he screams, “What is your name? What does he shut? He shuts his eyes.  What does he hear? He does not understand; he understands not.  How?  Who?  Where?  When?  …How can you be so impudent? I'm coming! I'll show you!  You don't turn whore for me... How they attend, they do attend,” and so on. At the end he scolds in quite inarticulate sounds... He speaks in an affected way, now babbling like a child, now lisping and stammering, sings suddenly in the middle of what he is saying, and grimaces.” (pp. 77–78)   
In contrast, a patient suffering from the attenuated “psychosis-like” variant of this symptom might use speech that is “vague,” “metaphorical,” “muddled,” “off track,” or “meandering;” although clearly understandable, in “severe” cases “the individual fails to get to the point without external guidance” or may have trouble coming up with the right word, “especially when the individual is under pressure, but re-orienting questions quickly return structure and organization to the conversation.”
Psychosis Risk Syndrome as Representative Anecdote
	For many critics, psychosis risk syndrome was an exemplar case of all the excesses of DSM-5.  Expressing a level of vehemence fairly typical of the polemics on either side of the controversy, Allen Frances sharply denounced the proposal, even while acknowledging his interlocutors' good intentions:
1) The “risk syndrome” would misidentify many (somewhere between 3-9) kids for every one correctly identified; and 2) the treatment most likely to be offered has no proven efficacy, but can have extremely dangerous complications.  This is clearly the prescription for an iatrogenic public health disaster. The goal of early identification and proactive treatment in psychiatry is laudable—but elusive and not currently attainable.  Prevention requires having a happy combination of accurate identification and effective and safe treatment.  Instead, we now have the opposite dangerous combination: wildly inaccurate identification with a likely ineffective but definitely risky treatment. (Frances, 2010c, para. 9–10; my emphasis)
I contend that the firestorm surrounding this proposed disorder was due in part to the wide range of contested issues that are entangled in the debate about its risks and benefits.  I conceptualize the disorder as a Burkean representative anecdote, a case exemplifying a terministic screen in which a special vocabulary is united with a motivational calculus “supple and complex enough to be representative of the subject matter it is designed to calculate.  It must have scope.  Yet it must also possess simplicity, in that it is broadly a reduction of the subject matter” (Burke, 1969a, p. 60).  Psychosis risk syndrome entails all or nearly all of the concepts and assumptions involved in the dominant view of psychosis in contemporary psychiatry, the approach to risk management in preventive psychiatry, and as can be seen in McGorry's corpus, the latent conflicts and unresolved ambiguities embedded in the epistemic compromise on which DSM rests.
Terministic Screen, Interpellation, and Stigma
      The terministic screen metaphor is visual in nature, referring to optical filters that can be applied to photographs.  Such filters make it possible to modify images so that they represent reality as conceived by the photographer.  Filters accomplish this by selecting some aspects of the captured image (e.g., color balance, contrast, etc.) to be featured and other aspects are excluded:
I have particularly in mind some photographs I once saw.  They were different photographs of the same objects, the difference being that they were made with different color filters.  Here something so “factual” as a photograph revealed notable distinctions in texture, and even in form, depending upon which color filter was used for the documentary description of the event being recorded. (Burke, 1969a, p. 45, emphasis in the original)
Following Burke's metaphor, the relevant 'photographs' of adolescents being evaluated for psychosis risk syndrome come in the form of case reports in which biographical narratives are organized into 'symptoms' of the syndrome, each of which is reduced to a numerical score representing the degree to which the psychotic symptom is attenuated.  Each symptom is conceived as a continuous quantifiable continuum from 'normal' to 'psychotic' (the actual scales used vary by clinic).  Any quirky or unusual characteristic of the 'patient' is thus seen only as an attenuated expression of psychosis.  If a teenager views herself as especially creative or gifted, a psychiatrist looking through the lens of attenuated psychosis sees very mild grandiosity (a subset of delusional thoughts; a psychotic patient with delusions of grandeur, for example, might self-identify as Jesus).  Hence, the process of revealing a risk factor involves the corresponding concealing of non-medicalized interpretations of the 'patient's' personality traits, beliefs, and subjective experiences.
	A diagnosis of psychosis risk is not simply a passive label that only functions to indicate a clinical judgment about the probability that a particular pathological course will present in the patient so diagnosed.  Following Althusser (1994), I contend that the act of psychiatric diagnosis is a “ritual of ideological recognition…[that] hails or interpellates concrete individuals as concrete subjects” (p. 130).  Correspondingly, the DSM functions as an ‘ideological state apparatus,’ a relatively autonomous superstructural edifice that controls and regulates the working knowledge necessary to navigate the concrete and material network of mental health institutions.  A diagnosis designates the subject identity that constitutes a patient’s self-representation for all social relationships and connected practices within this network.  By accepting a diagnosis, patients produce imaginary accounts of their relationship to the real world, and the image of those accounts makes up the currently dominant biopolitical ideology.  
	This has long been the case, and it certainly is not limited to the domain of mental health. Furthermore, it is not necessarily a negative trend in world history.  As we will see in Chapter 4, a reified diagnosis can be alienating while simultaneously serving as a basis for solidarity formation.  Furthermore, most individuals who will receive a DSM-5 diagnosis at some point are suffering, and the diagnosis opens new opportunities for relief.  Nevertheless, the diagnosis of a risk syndrome extends the totalizing reach of this ideological formation, for good or ill.  There is a non-zero probability that any given person is in the early, pre-symptomatic phase of some mental illness.  This is all the truer given the trend toward viewing the symptoms of mental illness as falling on a relatively smooth continuum between normalcy and insanity.  
	For Althusser, the act of interpellation by its very nature is never recognized by the individual as a process of transformation by which they receive their subject position.  Instead, individuals mis-recognize the event as a confirmation of their “always-already” status as subjects (Althusser, 1994, p. 130).  Upon receiving the initial diagnosis, the patient did not just become ‘depressed’ or ‘bipolar’ in her mind; that’s how she’s always been, and now she has a name for it, a way to make sense of it and to relate to others.  This new identity and set of terms with which one can finally put into words the heretofore ineffable psychic distress that led to the diagnosis are the discursive mechanisms by which the mis-recognition of interpellation occurs.  From the “evidentness of the subject” proceeds the “evidentness of meaning,” which is further confirmed by the institutional checking of identity that occurs every time the patient-subject fills a prescription, makes an appointment, or makes a health insurance claim (Pêcheux, 2012, p. 147, emphasis in the original).  The diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome, then, has the potential to transform the self-concepts of patients according to autobiographical narratives governed by the terministic screen of attenuated psychosis.
Risks of Psychosis Risk Syndrome
      The magnitude of the potential impacts on either side of the controversy is high.  All parties involved concede that all courses of action will both help and harm, though they disagree on the ratios.  These differences are not quantitative, but qualitative.  On one hand, with a three-year ‘false positive’ rate of 68%, treatment options that include the atypical antipsychotic drugs aripiprazole (Abilify), olanzapine (Zyprexa), and risperidone (Risperdal), and children as the target population, the diagnosis is depicted as a recipe for drugging all the children not already on psychostimulants for ADHD with major tranquilizers, with the full knowledge that the vast majority of children treated would not have become psychotic if left untreated.  On the other hand, given that a diagnosis of schizophrenia very often means a life of partial or full disability, early interventions have been shown to be very effective in preventing psychosis, and no patient can (currently) receive the diagnosis without first being help-seeking, critics of the diagnosis are depicted as paranoid, vaguely Szaszian opponents of medical progress.  Both sides concede that there is a great deal of uncertainty about how the diagnosis would be deployed by non-specialist clinicians and research departments of pharmaceutical corporations.  Which risk is the biggest?  
False Positives and the Rhetorical Ontology of Risk
	The issue of so-called false positives has been at the forefront of the controversy.  The predictive validity of the selection criteria for diagnosing an ARMS or a psychosis prodrome has been one of the chief concerns of early intervention researchers (Cannon, Cornblatt, & McGorry, 2007; Yung, Fusar-Poli, & Nelson, 2012; Yung, Nelson, Thompson, & Wood, 2010; Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004).  A fairly consistent finding that, with the best criteria that have been developed, about one-third of those identified will transition to frank psychosis within two years, although one longitudinal study determined that after eight years more than 50% of the identified individuals had received a psychotic disorder diagnosis (Chuma & Mahadun, 2011; Frances, 2010c; Kecmanovi?, 2011; Thompson, Nelson, & Yung, 2011; Yung & Nelson, 2011; Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004).  Yung and McGorry also conceded that “the onset of psychosis is arbitrarily defined and does not differ qualitatively from subthreshold psychosis,” raising a fundamental epistemic problem (Yung & McGorry, 2007, p. s1).  Indeed, Parnas (2005) suggests that this is “not only a psychometric problem, but a theoretical issue intimately associated with the conceptual validity of schizophrenia, that is what we take schizophrenia to be in the first place” (p. s112).
	It gets worse.  It turns out that as time went on, the 'false positive' rate of every clinic seemed to get worse, as they became more well-known and were referred more marginal cases (Yung et al., 2003).  This points to the fact that these clinics are all highly specialized and run by psychiatrists whose careers have been devoted to psychosis risk.  We know what happens when those psychiatrists try to predict psychosis.  What would happen if regular psychiatrists, or worse, primary care physicians, were to try to apply the same criteria?  This gets at a basic distinction between risk and uncertainty.  For contemporary theorists, risk entails the quantification of probabilities, while with uncertainty, “We know that we do not know, but that is almost all that we know” (Callon et al., 2009, p. 21).  Yet amidst the uncertainty, there is calculation.  If there is a problem in specialized clinics, then, a fortiori, regular psychiatrists and general practitioners should be even less accurate (bracketing off the question of what the pharmaceutical industry will do to change the way the category is put into practice).  Even the most ardent proponents of early interventions concede that the risk is substantial (McGorry, 2011).  Frances suggests that “the false positive rate would jump... to about 90 percent in general practice.  This means that as many as an astounding nine in ten individuals identified as 'risk syndrome' would not really be at risk for developing psychosis” (Frances, 2010c, para. 4).  This would expose a potentially large population to risks that “include unnecessary fear of illness, restriction of life goals, use of medication and their side-effects” (Warner, 2005, p. s104).
	But whether an individual case of non-transition to frank psychosis within a set time period should be regarded as a 'false positive' depends on the rhetorical ontology of the 'at risk state.'  The issue rests on what Prelli calls an 'interpretive-definitional' stasis point – that is, “What does construct y mean?” (Prelli, 1989, p. 146).  One frequent topic of discussion at the UCLA conference over thirty years ago was this metaphysical question: what exactly is meant when an individual is said to be 'at risk' or 'at high risk' of developing a psychotic disorder?  I contend that there are essentially three basic interpretations of psychosis risk, and an additional interpretation that is a permutation of two: (1) a confluence of risk factors that are neither necessary nor sufficient for psychosis but increase the probability that an individual will later meet the diagnostic criteria for a psychotic disorder; (2) vulnerability, a trait that makes an individual particularly susceptible to developing a psychotic disorder; (3) a prodrome or prodromal phase that precedes psychosis in those destined (barring an intervention of some sort) to become psychotic; and (4) a combination of the prodrome and risk factors interpretations, which treats the phenomenology of the prodrome as a state risk factor (an 'at risk mental state') for developing a psychotic disorder in the future (Table 1).


Table 1: Interpretations of Psychosis Risk Syndrome
Interpretation of psychosis risk syndrome
Risk factors
Vulnerability
Prodrome 
'At Risk
Mental State'PathogenesisExopathogenicEndopathogenicEndopathogenicEndopathogenicDominant theory
of probabilityFrequentistPropensityEvidential/
BayesianEvidential/
BayesianObject of probabilistic predictionPopulation of patientsIndividual patientIndividual patientIndividual patientWill correctly identified individuals become psychotic absent treatment?Not necessarily, and probably notNot necessarily, but probablyYesNot necessarily, and probably notWhat is the inferential object of probability?Likelihood that someone correctly diagnosed develops psychosisLikelihood that someone correctly diagnosed develops psychosisLikelihood that the diagnosis is accurateLikelihood that someone correctly diagnosed develops psychosisImplicational relationship to the emergence of psychosisNeither necessary
nor sufficientNecessary, but not sufficientSufficient, and may or may not also be necessaryNeither necessary
nor sufficient

	I shall provide examples of each of these interpretations, discuss their presence in the recent debate surrounding DSM-5, and explain why the failure of the majority of interlocutors to carefully define their terms or acknowledge the existence of alternative interpretations made much of their debate incoherent.
(1) Risk Factors Interpretation
	Arnold Friedhoff introduces the issue and explains its importance, mentioning as popular an interpretation grounded in frequentist probability:
Before addressing the issues of risk measurement and modification, it is necessary to have a precise understanding of the word, “risk.”  “High-risk group” generally is taken to mean a group in which some members will eventually develop the condition in question, while others will not.  Thus, preventive intervention or risk modification carried out with members of a high-risk group will invariably be applied to some individuals who would not have developed the condition in the first place, inasmuch as those actually at risk may not be distinguishable from those potentially at risk until sometime after the preventive intervention has been carried out. (Friedhoff, 1981, p. 39)
As basic and as reasonable as this seems, such a discussion is remarkably under-discussed in the current debate, even when the meaning left ambiguous directly bares on the arguments being made, as I will show shortly.  
	Certainly, if one's definition of an at-risk state implies that pathology is already present, then primary prevention is no longer possible, and efforts directed toward the identified population are in fact “secondary prevention,” i.e., preventing already present but unrecognized pathology from becoming worse, or “tertiary prevention,” to slow down the progress of a disease that has already very clearly initiated (Fish, 1981, p. 226).  Holzman argues that  the “risk factors” interpretation
refers to statistical probabilities that some groups of people will become affected by a particular disorder.  Thus, being a child of a schizophrenic parent puts that child in a group with a larger statistical risk than the general population runs, although that child may not be at all vulnerable because he or she may not have the specific—but as yet unknown—structural underpinning that predisposes to schizophrenia. Risk factors are neither necessary nor sufficient conditions for the occurrence of a disease...  They... are not intrinsically characteristic of the person at risk.  (Holzman, 1981, p. 20, my emphasis)
An example of a risk factor, which Holzman calls “exopathogenic,” is cigarette smoking, which dramatically increases the risk that one will develop lung cancer (p. 20).  
	With this interpretation, one can make a diagnosis while remaining fairly agnostic about the actual mechanisms involved.  As that follows the general ideology of DSM-III, it could be taken as a default position in the post DSM-III era, though it is not used consistently or unambiguously by the vast majority of participants in the controversy.  Further, this interpretation is grounded in a frequentist theory of probability, according to which the probability of an event is conceived of as the likely frequency of that event's occurrence were the situation repeated an arbitrarily large number of times.  This is well-suited to describe the probability of events that are specific to individuals in a population, because each individual within the population provides a unique trial, and the overall frequency of the event in the population can be measured directly (Venn, 1888).  If nrf is the total number of people in a population defined by a set of risk factors, and npd is the number of those individuals that developed a psychotic disorder within a given time limit (two years is usually used), then the probability P(pd) of an individual with the specified risk factors will develop a psychotic disorder can be approximated according to this equation:

Frequentist inferences are only approximations in the short run or for single individuals, but provided that one is interested in populations rather than individual subjects, one can take a direct measurement.  Since the risk factor interpretation gives approximate estimates for individuals, an individual who is diagnosed as having a relevant risk factor who does not end up with a psychotic disorder is not a 'false positive' unless the criteria were incorrectly measured.
(2) Vulnerability Interpretation
	Friedhoff suggested a second interpretation, one he embraced in his research, that more clearly embraces the notion of susceptibility:
Another way in which the notion of biological risk is often used is that an individual carries a marker that is associated with vulnerability to a condition or with the condition itself.  The implication is that a person so affected will get the disorder associated with the marker or is more vulnerable to that disorder. (Friedhoff, 1981, p. 40)
This vulnerability interpretation was also distinguished from the risk factors interpretation by Holzman, who stressed the troubles that can arise from carelessness-driven ambiguity, especially “when the disease processes involved are poorly understood,” while articulating the meaning of 'vulnerability' more precisely:
[The] terms “vulnerability” and “risk factors” ...are not synonymous, and using them interchangeably can lead to confusion among conceptual and empirical issues.  Vulnerability refers to a perceivable, palpable, or measurable variation in structure or function that represents a predisposition to a specific disease process...  All of these [vulnerability] traits are identifiable prior to the onset of the disease and place the person possessing such traits in a position of being susceptible to the specific disorders, given certain known or as yet unknown environmental conditions.  These traits, moreover, are not intrinsically the disease.  They represent a necessary but not sufficient condition for the disease to develop. (Holzman, 1981, pp. 19–20, my emphasis)
An example of a vulnerability trait, which Holzman calls “endopathogenic,” is a genetic mutation that prevents an individual from being able to manufacture the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which would make one vulnerable to phenylketonuria (PKU).  One (humoral) endopathogen that Holzman believes might be relevant to psychosis, studied by Freud (1937) and Pavlov (1927), is temperament.  
	Holzman is explicit that vulnerability is distinct from the disease itself.  This is not mere metaphysical posturing – in the example of genetic susceptibility to PKU, the process by which one is susceptible and the process by which the disease itself proceeds are arguably distinguishable if not clearly distinct.  Classical PKU is caused by a mutation in a gene located on the twelfth chromosome that is responsible for the enzyme PAH (Filiano, 2006).  The enzyme PAH converts an amino acid called phenylalanine into another amino acid called tyrosine, which is necessary for the synthesis of certain neurotransmitters called catecholamines (dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine).  A small amount of the phenylalanine will be metabolized through alternate pathways, but all the unconverted phenylalanine will compete with other large neutral amino acids for transport across the blood-brain barrier (Pietz et al., 1999).  The combination of insufficient tyrosine and excess phenylalanine in the brain contribute to frontal lobe dysfunction, which can produce severe intellectual impairments (Janke & Klein-Tasman, 2012; Michals & Matalon, 1985).  
	The question is whether the essence of the disease entity PKU is the genetic mutation or is the processes by which intellectual impairments occur that are caused by the genetic mutation.  If the genetic mutation is identified in a newborn, a combination of diet and medication will allow for normal brain development; in untreated adults, the damage is beyond repair (MacLeod & Ney, 2010).  Is that intervention a way of preventing the disease in someone who is vulnerable, or is it a way of treating the disease in someone who is afflicted by it?  This is not a question that is answerable by science.  Rather, it is an artifact of the human communication processes that are enlisted to produce a nosological terministic screen.  
	The vulnerability interpretation dominated the discussion at the UCLA conference on preventive intervention in schizophrenia, but has essentially disappeared from the discussion, except insofar as individual risk factors or hypothetical prodromal mechanisms are elaborated in terms of susceptibility—but the etiological nihilism of DSM-III has led to a repression of this mode of argumentative reasoning.
(3) Prodrome or Prodromal Phase Interpretation
	If one is inclined to view the genetic mutation as an integral component of the disease entity, then its detection in asymptomatic newborns allows for an early diagnosis, and barring that, early developmental problems, along with seizures, certain skin problems, and other symptoms could be thought of as a prodromal phase of PKU.  
	This is the language that is used by many who are involved in the psychosis risk controversy and who understand the diagnosis to apply to patients in the earliest stage of schizophrenia or a related psychotic disorder, called the ‘prodromal phase’ or ‘prodrome,’ from the Greek pródromos (?????????), meaning ‘forerunner’ (Fava, Grandi, Canestrari, & Molnar, 1990; Fava & Kellner, 1991; Jackson, Cavanagh, & Scott, 2003; Yung & McGorry, 1996b).  The word prodrome is used in migraine sufferers to describe the constellation of signs and symptoms—mood changes; irritability; thirst; yawning; an 'aura' of flickering light, or hallucinations, or partial vision loss—that precede the onset of a migraine headache (Kelman, 2004).  Like John the Baptist, whom Christians call the Prodromos (?????????), the migraine prodrome in a sense testifies concerning the headache, that through these symptoms, the migraineur might believe he or she is about to suffer a migraine; the prodrome itself is not the headache, but comes as a witness to the headache which is to follow.125  Prodromal symptoms are described as “premonitory,” which is to say that they are like an oracle that gives a warning in advance of some set of events which are fated to occur (Kelman, 2004, p. 865).  
	If the cause of schizophrenia was something like a mutation to a specific known gene (as with PKU), this might not make much of a difference.  The etiology of psychotic disorders is unfortunately still unknown, and while some aspects of its pathophysiology are understood (some sort of excess of dopamine and/or deficiency in glutamate, as discussed in Chapter 2), even those are debated.  Most people agree that there are usually some early signs and symptoms that precede the onset of frank psychosis, but those signs and symptoms are notably non-specific and heterogeneous – the same symptoms precede lots of other mental disorders or sometimes no disorder at all.  Kline indicated that “hysterical and and neurasthenic symptoms are the commonest precursors, but we cannot assume that the 'neurasthenia' developed into schizophrenia, but rather that in the beginning stages of schizophrenia, neurasthenic symptoms dominated the picture” (Kline, 1966, p. 28).  In this we can see an intentional commitment to the prodromal interpretation rather than the vulnerability or risk factor interpretation.
	There are two implications of the prodrome interpretation.  First, the individual is symptomatic during the prodromal phase, which is possible but not necessarily true of the vulnerability interpretation (if, for example, the vulnerability factor was a specific gene that infants could be screened for); second, the individual “will develop a full-blown illness following the prodrome” (Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004, p. 6).  This rests on an evidential (or Bayesian) theory of probability, according to which probabilities reflect the degree of certainty one has that a given outcome will occur based on the state of the evidence (Erickson & Smith, 1988).  That is because any probability measurement is an estimation of how confident the diagnostician is that the symptoms he or she is observing in a given patient are in fact manifestations of a prodrome.  Individuals diagnosed as prodromal who do not develop a psychotic disorder are 'false positives,' and we can say the diagnosis was objectively incorrect.
(4) 'At Risk Mental State' (ARMS) Interpretation
	For this reason, it is only possible to diagnosis a prodrome retrospectively.  This fact was emphasized by Yung, Phillips, and McGorry (2004), who argue:
This issue is more than just semantics.  The danger of labelling a syndrome prospectively as a schizophrenia 'prodrome' (or of labelling an individual cross-sectionally as 'prodromal') tends to reify the syndrome as a disorder or disease, with its own natural history and prognosis (eventual transition to frank psychosis).  Instead, the syndrome, which seems like, or could be, a prodrome should be thought of, not as a disease entity, but as a state risk factor for full-blown psychosis.  That is, the presence of the syndrome implies that the affected person is at that time more likely to develop psychosis in the near future than someone without the syndrome.  However, if the symptoms resolve then the danger of increased risk remits as well.  In an attempt to deal with these issues we have coined a new term, the 'at risk mental state.' (Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004, p. 25)
This approach is not limited to retrogressive analysis, which can tell you a lot about the people who eventually developed frank psychosis, but nothing about the people who seemed identical to the first group except that the never developed frank psychosis.  Instead, this interpretation suggests that researchers should examine 'enriched samples' via a 'close-in strategy' that include people who are positive for multiple distinct risk factors (Bell, 1992; Häfner et al., 1994; Poulton et al., 2000).  Sometimes individuals so identified are considered to be at 'ultra high risk' (UHR) (Yung et al., 2012, 2010; Yung, Phillips, Yuen, & McGorry, 2004).  This permuted interpretation was the one adopted by those conducting research on early interventions in psychosis risk over the last two decades, though their interlocutors at various points adopt different interpretations or no clear interpretation.  
	Several ideas of risk are combined in this interpretation.  To be 'at' risk implies that risk is a location that one can occupy.  That it is conferred on individuals implies that risk is a status, as it is often explicitly described.  It is also common to see risk in this context described as a possession, i.e., that someone has increased risk.  It is also common to see risk treated as an attribute or quality, i.e., that someone is a 'high risk patient.'  This all suggests that risk is a term that can operate on multiple discursive modalities at once.  This flexibility can sometimes be a weakness in that it increases the discursive space for misunderstanding and miscommunication.  
	Stephan Heckers (2009) suggests that the prodrome interpretation, which he links with Bleuler's concept of latent schizophrenia, and the risk factors interpretation are not actually compatible: 	
The period of subthreshold psychosis before the first episode of a psychotic disorder is often referred to as the prodrome.  The prodrome is, by definition, the nascent stage of a disorder (hence the term latent schizophrenia).  In contrast, a risk syndrome is not necessarily linked to a disorder.  The value of a risk syndrome increases with the accuracy in predicting future outcomes (e.g., metabolic syndrome leading to diabetes or cardiovascular disease; mild cognitive impairment leading to dementia), but the conversion to disease is, by definition, less than 100%.  In short, a prodrome is part and parcel of the disorder, [while] a risk syndrome is not. (Heckers, 2009, p. 849)
Because of the ambiguity involved in combining two basic interpretations, and because debates often center around core issues like false positives (or 'false false positives,' in which “a true vulnerability exists though it has not yet been fully expressed”) and specific statistical measures, this permuted interpretation tends to promote muddled debates with essential concepts poorly defined or never even considered (Yung, Phillips, & McGorry, 2004, p. 30).  If the disorder is a risk syndrome, then the rate of transition to frank psychosis really has nothing to do with the 'false positive' rate, but if the disorder is a prodrome, it has everything to do with it.  
Brief Excursus on Melancholia
	Further muddling the issue is that the risk factors interpretation and the prodrome interpretation are individually grounded in distinct nosological assumptions, one reflecting the paradigm of DSM-III and DSM-IV while the other reflecting some of the ideas behind DSM-5, which is another reason why this diagnostic controversy is synecdochic for the larger set of controversies surrounding DSM-5.  As I discussed in the Chapter 1, DSM-III came with a revolution of etiological nihilism designed to desanctify the psychodynamic theories of the past.  The unstated goal of course was not to remain agnostic with respect to the underlying disease processes, but to move toward a biological model.  DSM-5 was supposed to do that, although it largely did not abandon the etiological nihilism of the previous two editions.  One example that illustrates the problem is 'melancholia.'
	In 2010, a list of seventeen eminent mental health professionals, including Robert Spitzer (DSM-III chair), Max Fink, David Healy, Edward Shorter, Gordon Parker, and Michael Taylor – a collection that includes psychiatrists, psychoanalysts, psychopharmacologists, historians, and critics of the pharmaceutical industry – wrote an article in the American Journal of Psychiatry advancing the case for DSM-5 to include an independent diagnosis of melancholia,
a syndrome with a long history and distinctly specific psychopathological features... [which] possesses a distinctive biological homogeneity in clinical experience and laboratory test markers, and... is differentially responsive to specific treatment interventions.  It therefore deserves recognition as a separate identifiable mood disorder. (Parker et al., 2010, p. 745)
The advocates of melancholia combined diagnostic data, treatment data, and historical analysis to make an extremely convincing case that melancholia is an entirely distinct form of depression, and that there are in fact “two separate depressions” (Shorter, 2007, p. 5).
	This is exactly the kind of diagnosis that fit the DSM-5 ideology.  As Greenberg observed:
Distinctive signs, symptoms, lab studies, course, and outcome—if melancholia wasn’t the Holy Grail, it was at least a sip from the chalice of science, one disorder that could go beyond appearances. You would think that the committee would at least have been eager to consider it as a partial remedy for ongoing concerns about the profession’s lack of scientific rigor. (Greenberg, 2013b, para. 8)
Melancholia is a specific subtype of depression that can be identified with biological tests – it measurably disrupts the sleep architecture of the patient and causes hypercortisolism (i.e., excessive blood levels of cortisol), which can be identified with a dexamethasone suppression test (DST).  All of this testing has a purpose, because unlike other variants of depression, it responds best to the older, seldom prescribed tricyclic antidepressants as well as electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) (Parker et al., 2010).  
	These apparent strengths were actually weaknesses, as William Coryell, one of the members of the DSM-5 Mood Disorders Work Group, wrote in a private correspondence to Max Fink: “I agree there is more data to support using DST for melancholia than for using any other measure for any other diagnosis,” but it would be “very hard to sell since it would be... the only biological test for any diagnosis being considered” (cited in Greenberg, 2013a, p. 337).  The diagnosis did not even make it into the draft proposals, which is to say that it was not even considered.  Greenberg argues that the reason is clear:
[A] test for melancholia would make the lack of biological measures elsewhere in the DSM that much more glaring.  It was a success that would only highlight the APA's failures... Offered a key to one of the cells of its epistemic prison, the APA had decided that the cost of freedom was too high. (pp. 337-338)
As one blogger and professional scientist commented about the affair: “Psychiatry finally encounters science—and rejects it” (Couch, 2013, para. 1).
	What does this have to do with psychosis risk syndrome?  It provides a glimpse of a scientific field caught in between two paradigms, grasping hold of each with one hand and falling through the middle.  The confused interpretation of psychosis risk syndrome as both a risk syndrome and a prodrome is symptomatic of this problem – on the one hand, committed to etiological nihilism, on the other hand reaching for biological etiology, pathogenesis, tests, and treatments.  And the failure of most of the most vocal participants in the controversy to even bother to clarify the interpretation of psychosis risk as they saw it is betrays an argument community in chaos.
Changes in the DSM-5 Draft Revisions
	In August of 2010, following the first round of public comments on the manuscript, the work group renamed the proposed diagnosis ‘attenuated psychotic symptoms syndrome,’ and in April of 2012, following the second round of public comments, the work group again renamed the proposed diagnosis ‘attenuated psychosis syndrome’ and recommended it be included in Section III of DSM-5 along with other “conditions that require further research” (American Psychiatric Association, 2012a).  The final version of the proposed criteria set for the condition of attenuated psychosis syndrome, which appears in Table 3 (Table 2 shows the changes between each draft that appeared on dsm5.org), is a mildly revised form of the April 2012 draft (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, pp. 783–786).
Table 2: Revision History for Psychosis Risk Syndrome Criteria
 
(changes in bold)

April 27, 2012August 3, 2010February 15, 2010Attenuated Psychosis SyndromeAttenuated Psychotic Symptoms SyndromePsychosis Risk SyndromeAll six of the following:All six of the following:a) At least one of the following symptoms are present in attenuated form with relatively intact reality testing, but of sufficient severity and/or frequency to warrant clinical attention:


1. delusions/delusional ideas
2. hallucinations/perceptional abnormalities
3. disorganized speech/communicationa) Characteristic symptoms: at least one of the following in attenuated form with intact reality testing, but of sufficient severity and/or frequency that it is not discounted or ignored;



(i) delusions
(ii) hallucinations

(iii) disorganized speecha)  Characteristic symptoms: at least one of the following in attenuated form with intact reality testing, but of sufficient severity and/or frequency so as to be beyond normal variation;


(i) delusions
(ii) hallucinations

(iii) disorganized speechb) Symptoms in Criterion A must be present at least once per week for the past month.b) Frequency/Currency: symptoms meeting criterion A must be present in the past month and occur at an average frequency of at least once per week in past monthb) Frequency/Currency: symptoms meeting criterion A must be present in the past month and occur at an average frequency of at least once per week in past monthc) Symptoms in Criterion A must have begun or worsened in the past year.c) Progression: symptoms meeting criterion A must have begun in or significantly worsened in the past year;c) Progression: symptoms meeting criterion A must have begun in or significantly worsened in the past year;d) Symptoms in Criterion A are sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual and/or legal guardian to lead them to seek help.d) Distress/Disability/ Treatment Seeking: symptoms meeting criterion A are sufficiently distressing and disabling to the patient and/or parent/guardian to lead them to seek helpd) Distress/Disability/ Treatment seeking: symptoms are sufficiently distressing and/or disabling to the patient and/or others to lead to help-seekinge) Symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by any other DSM-5 diagnosis, including Substance-Related Disorders.e) Symtpoms [sic] meeting criterion A are not better explained by any DSM-5 diagnosis, including substance-related disorder.e) Characteristic attenuated psychotic symptoms are not better explained by another DSM-V diagnosisf)  Clinical criteria for a Psychotic Disorder have never been met.f) Clinical criteria for any DSM-V psychotic disorder have never been met.f) Clinical criteria for any DSM-V psychotic disorder have never been met
Table 3: Final Version of Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome in DSM-5

(From the 'Conditions for Further Study' chapter in Section III, 'Emerging Measures and Models,' pp. 783-786)

Attenuated Psychosis SyndromeProposed CriteriaA.  At least one of the following symptoms is present in attenuated form,  
      with relatively in-tact reality testing, and is of sufficient severity or  
      frequency to warrant clinical attention:

      1.  Delusions.
      2.  Hallucinations.
      3.  Disorganized speech.
B.  Symptom(s) must have been present at least once per week for the past
      month.C.  Symptom(s) must have begun or worsened in the past year.D.  Symptom(s) is sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual to
      warrant clinical attention.E.  Symptom(s) is not better explained by another mental disorder,
      including a depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features, and is
      not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another
      medical condition.F.  Criteria for any psychotic disorder have never been met.
      Specifically, the last draft revision (April 27, 2012) before the official criteria were published provided six necessary criteria (the bolded words were not present in previous revisions):
 A.  At least one of the following symptoms are presented in attenuated form with relatively intact reality testing, but of sufficient severity and/or frequency to warrant clinical attention:
1. delusions/delusional ideas  
2. hallucinations/perceptional abnormalities
3. disorganized speech/communication
 B.  Symptoms in Criterion A must be present at least once per week for the past month.
 C.  Symptoms in Criterion A must have begun or worsened in the past year.
 D.  Symptoms in Criterion A are sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual and/or legal guardian to lead them to seek help.
 E.  Symptoms in Criterion A are not better explained by any other DSM-5 diagnosis, including Substance-Related Disorders.
 F.  Clinical criteria for a Psychotic Disorder have never been met. (American Psychiatric Association, 2012a)
Each of these criteria (especially A, B, and D) has undergone minor changes in wording over the course of the revisions.  In the August 2010 version, when the disorder was called ‘Attenuated Psychotic Symptoms Syndrome,’ Criterion A did not contain the word “relatively,” but did contain the words “…that it is not discounted or ignored” instead of “…to warrant clinical attention” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010h).  This was also a change from the initial February 2010 version, when the disorder was called ‘Psychosis Risk Syndrome,’ in which Criterion A instead ended with the words “…so as to be beyond normal variation” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010g).  In both earlier versions, the three sub-points of Criterion A were simply ‘delusions,’ ‘hallucinations,’ and ‘disorganized speech.’ The first four criteria were also all named: ‘a) Characteristic symptoms,’ ‘b) Frequency/Currency,’ ‘c) Progression,’ and ‘d) Distress/Disability/Treatment Seeking.’  In both earlier versions, Criterion B contained the words “at an average frequency of” immediately before the words “at least once per week,” and both contained the word “significantly” before “worsened” in Criterion C.  Criterion D was worded differently in the August 2010 version: “Distress/Disability/Treatment Seeking: symptoms meeting criterion A are sufficiently distressing and disabling to the patient and/or guardian to lead them to seek help” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010h).  Before that, it read “Distress/Disability/Treatment Seeking: symptoms are sufficiently distressing and/or disabling to the patient and/or others to lead to help seeking” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010g).  In the original version, Criterion E was worded differently and did not mention Substance-Related Disorders: “Characteristic attenuated psychotic symptoms are not better explained by another DSM-V diagnosis.”  Finally, Criterion F in both previous versions specified “any DSM-V psychotic disorder” instead of “a Psychotic Disorder.”  See Table 2 for a side-by-side comparison of the different drafts of the proposed revision.
	These changes reflect rhetorical interests rather than scientific ones.  Though they appear mostly trivial, so did all the hand-wringing concerning the term 'neurosis' in DSM-III that the Assembly of Delegates of the APA hashed out in a meeting, much of which
was taken up with disputes over the placement of words, the use of modifiers, the capitalization of entries... Each adjustment, each attempt at fine tuning, carried with it symbolic importance to those engaged in a process that was at once political and scientific. (Bayer & Spitzer, 1985, p. 193)
In other words, every subtle change is undoubtedly the deliberate result of a consensus-forming process, the details of which are secret.  The name of the ‘condition’ (the noun introduced in the final revision) changed, we are told, because a “review of the data” revealed that it would be
premature to recommend a new category based primarily on future risk (i.e., “Psychosis Risk Syndrome”) and not on current clinical need.  We recognized that a majority of individuals with this condition did not go on to develop a psychotic disorder and that most individuals with this condition had additional relevant clinical needs other than risk of conversion to psychosis.  Consequently, a condition that described current clinical need (“Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome”) was considered instead. (American Psychiatric Association, 2012a, emphasis in original)
This explanation is dubious because the most significant change to the diagnosis was the name of the condition.  It points to an unresolved identity crisis from which this diagnosis suffers.  The only conceivable rationale for this change in name is the concern raised by critics about the so-called 'false positives.'  The APA in its rationale for the disorder was careful not to articulate which interpretation of risk syndrome it accepted, but the issue lurked in the background, though not as a matter of science.  By manipulating the name of the disorder, more confusion regarding the terms of the debate could be manufactured.  If the name change indicates any substantive difference, it is that the diagnosis went from being a ‘risk syndrome’ – that is, a constellation of risk factors – to a mental disorder (or ‘condition,’ as they say) in its own right.  
	The text of the proposed diagnostic criteria was further altered between the April 2012 draft and the final version appearing in Table 3.  The final 's' in 'symptoms' was given parentheses, i.e., 'symptom(s)', emphasizing that the patient might only have a single category of attenuated psychotic symptoms.  The secondary descriptors of these categories in criterion A ('delusional ideas' after 'delusions,' 'perceptual abnormalities' after 'hallucinations,' and 'communication' after 'disorganized speech') that had been added to the April draft were dropped.  Also in criterion A, a subtle change was made to the conjunction following the phrase 'relatively in-tact reality testing.'  Those words were followed by “but of sufficient severity...” in the draft version, and “and is of sufficient severity...” in the final version.  This has the effect of militating against the notion that attenuated psychotic symptoms in a patient with insight are inherently insufficiently severe.  Criterion E was modified to clarify that an individual who did not have a “Substance Related Disorder,” but nevertheless was under the influence of a drug capable of inducing psychosis, so that the observed attenuated psychotic symptoms could be attributed to the “physiological effects” of the drug, should not be given the diagnosis.  
	More significantly, Criterion D was modified from requiring that the symptoms be “sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual and/or legal guardian to lead them to seek help” to instead requiring that they be “sufficiently distressing and disabling to the individual to warrant clinical attention.”  There are two significant changes here.  First, removing the “and/or legal guardian...” clause helps mollify concerns that the proposed diagnosis will be used to classify individuals against their will or on the basis of a recommendation from an annoyed teacher or frustrated parent.  The second change works somewhat in the opposite direction, modifying the criterion so that it is no longer sufficient to be help-seeking—one's symptoms must actually “warrant clinical attention.”  This would perhaps exclude the so-called 'worried well' that might be suffering from what used to be called hypochondriasis, now “Illness Anxiety Disorder” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 315).  But it would also include the non-help seeking who perhaps ought to be help-seeking in the judgment of the diagnosing clinician.  That change seems, in my judgment, counter-productive, as the emphasis on care-seeking patients provides a strong answer to concerns about over-diagnosis, as it ensures that the diagnosis would only be applied to people who, at a minimum, already were seeking a diagnosis.  It also suggests the final redactor curiously was more concerned about the problem of 'false negatives' than 'false positives.'
Controversy During DSM-5 Revision Process
	What difference does it make if there are many false positives or few?  After all, the issue of false positives is never even raised with other risk syndromes like high blood pressure or high cholesterol.  People who are prescribed a statin126 who don't have a heart attack are not regarded as 'false positives,' nor are people who smoke tobacco but live to be 100.  Apparently, the equation changes when the intervention entails the possibility of medicating non-psychotic children with anti-psychotic medication.  
	As I stated earlier, McGorry and his colleagues used a variety of interventions including antipsychotic medication, but they found that CBT and essential fatty acid supplementation were equally effective at preventing psychosis, and could reduce the rate of transition from one-third to approximately 10% (McGorry, Killackey, & Yung, 2008).  This suggests that if 100 patients are diagnosed, 20 of the could be prevented from developing a psychotic disorder, at the cost of unnecessarily treating about 70 of them (although the assumption that at least some of those 70 would not nevertheless benefit from the intervention is not necessarily sound).  
	Several other research groups in recent years have found similar results.  Research groups in Copenhagen, Denmark, and at the Institute of Psychiatry in London have established a similar program for early diagnosis and intervention, also using atypical antipsychotics, fatty acid supplementation, and cognitive therapy.  Results were equivocal for those receiving treatment for first-episode psychosis (Gafoor et al., 2010).  There is some evidence that in these cases, early intervention is associated with a positive outcome, but the meaning of this finding is obscure because patients “suffering from a psychosis of recent onset, however, are more likely to experience a spontaneous remission of illness, and this may readily explain the observed association” (Warner, 2005, p. s104).  A meta-analysis of 66 studies found that they could significantly reduce the rate of a second psychotic episode, but that it was necessary to treat 8 patients to prevent one relapse (Alvarez-Jiménez, Parker, Hetrick, McGorry, & Gleeson, 2011).  A Scandinavian study, 'Treatment and Intervention in Psychosis' (TIPS), has experienced success treating psychosis (not prepsychosis) early, finding that early treatment “not only facilitates recovery, it also affects the core neurobiological deficit process that characterises the early course of the disorder” (S. P. Singh, 2010, pp. 343–344).  
	In the face of all the arguments about predictive validity, coupled with the arguments about the unknown risk associated with unleashing the diagnosis on general practitioners, school nurses, teachers, etc., especially given the ability of the pharmaceutical industry to run direct-to-consumer advertising in the United States, McGorry had a sudden change of heart in 2011 about the desirability of formally including the diagnosis in DSM-5, saying “I think it's a valid point to be concerned about the harms particularly in places like America... I think probably I have given a bit more weight to that argument now” (cited in Corderoy, 2012, para. 4).  This was after he completed a long series of exchanges with his critics, one of whom praised him for “engaging in constructive, robust, debate” and having the courage to “restate his new position unambiguously in the mainstream media” (Whitely, 2011, 2012, para. 3–4).
	McGorry and his colleagues understood that their views were controversial, and that, to an certain extent, reaching consensus would require more than just data:
In psychiatric as well as other reform processes, logic and scientific evidence are necessary but insufficient.  Rhetoric, marketing, effective networking, altruistic promotion of a vital public health issue, economic arguments and a confluence of common interests have fuelled the momentum and are vital for real reform to take root.  This is public policy analysis complementing evidence-based medicine.  Given the history of psychiatry where some of these factors have driven reform in the absence of evidence, this naturally makes some people nervous, but without these factors operating we will not only fail to translate the most strongly evidence-based practices... but our systems of care will fail to evolve and will again become paralysed...  Evidence is the language of reform but there are other elements in communication.  There is also rhetoric, prosody, persuasion and at the heart of things, a chorus of voices reflecting the human experience of illness and recovery.  (McGorry, Nordentoft, & Simonsen, 2005, pp. s2–s3)
This kind of frank acknowledgement of the importance of rhetoric in scientific deliberation is insightful, but nevertheless (or, perhaps, as a result), it arouses the suspicions of scientists.  Rhetoric, Weaver (1970a) notes, arouses “skepticism and suspicion… [It] is no exaggeration to say that eloquence itself has fallen into disfavor… [and] there emerges a conviction that man should dispense with persuasive speech and limit himself to mere communication” (pp. 161-162).  One unfortunate artifact of the Enlightenment is that 'science' has claimed ownership over 'facts,' and equated the non-scientific with the non-factual (Weaver, 1970b).  Further, in light of the great propaganda campaigns of the twentieth century, the classical view, defended by Aristotle, Isocrates, Cicero, Quintilian, and others, that, ceteris paribus, rhetoric prefers the good, even if it is sometimes enlisted by evil, seems entirely foreign to many in the scientific community (Crowley & Hawhee, 2004).
	Allen Frances gave voice to this kind of suspicion of rhetoric.  Though delighted that McGorry had changed his mind, having been persuaded by the arguments he and others had been making, Frances remained wary of McGorry.  Frances expressed concern about McGorry's recognition as Australian 'man of the year' in 2010, suggesting that “a dark cloud surrounds the silver lining of having one psychiatrist in a position of almost unopposed influence,” and arguing that McGorry has
developed the messianic blind spot that is so common in visionary prophets.  His zeal has made him an unreliable evaluator of scientific evidence, allowing him to defend absolutely indefensible positions with the convincing, but inaccurate, force of a true believer. A review of Professor McGorry’s public statements shows his willingness to ignore any evidence contrary to his belief, to change stated views back and forth when he regards this to be necessary or convenient, and to unfairly attack those who point out the fallacies and inconsistencies in his comments. His are the skills of a prophet and rainmaker, not those of a policy maker or a program developer or a sober reviewer of scientific evidence. (Frances, 2011c, para. 3)
Such a reaction suggests that changing one's mind after engaging in a public deliberative process, with an open mind and a willingness to be convinced, is a fundamentally radical act in late modern culture.  The paranoia about the risks of rhetoric is so strong that, even after successfully persuading him, Frances remained suspicious of the rhetorical skill of his past interlocutor.  It strikes me as rather ironic that Frances criticized McGorry for wielding great influence as a psychiatrist with pseudo-celebrity status.  Still, although McGorry did change his mind about the desirability of DSM-5 reification of psychosis risk syndrome, he and Frances still fundamentally disagree about the value of early interventions in psychosis given the current state of knowledge, so there is a point to Frances' protests.
	Frances is not alone in criticizing the dangers of rhetoric in the context of psychosis risk.  Amos (2013) suggests that “early intervention rhetoric distorts public policy” (p. 317).  Amos is not especially worried about the undue influence of rhetorical factors in the scientific debate among experts.  Instead, his primary concern lies with the non-expert audience that is in a position to make funding decisions for research projects:
[The] best antidote for the expert reader is to read the references and draw their own conclusions... [The] funding of mental health services is heavily influenced by expert opinion.  Robust debate and critical analysis is the only way to ensure that non-expert decision-makers can place their trust in the advice they receive regarding allocation of resources to competing mental health programmes.  If their peers do not identify flaws and insist upon high standards from EI proponents, the non-expert bodies who rely upon their advice will continue to make crucial decisions on grounds that can be questioned” (p.320)
He accuses early intervention researchers, especially McGorry and Yung, of having a “tendency to selectively report and liberally interpret results” (p. 318), and of taking his efforts to point out their methodological errors and distortions as personal attacks rather than as demands for better justification of their claims:
Despite being accused of personal incivility and an unstated agenda, in a spirit of scientific detachment I have given detailed examples of selective analysis and report which is likely to misrepresent the evidence regarding early intervention in psychosis.  I call for similarly detached responses. (p. 320)
It is clear that by 'rhetoric,' Amos is grouping all sorts of argumentation outside the norms of dispassionate scientific discourse.  Like Frances' polemic, Amos shows how these debates can get very personal.
	For his part, McGorry attributed his differences with Frances to the larger differences in health care between Australia and the United States:
A fundamental difference between the USA and Australia is that mental health professionals conceive of mental ill health and mental illness in a much more biopsychosocial and holistic manner. Both conceptually and through our universal system of health financing we respect and provide a much stronger level of psychosocial input to patients. We do not equate treatment with the prescription of medication. We do not permit direct marketing of pharmaceutical products to the public... Operating within such a different healthcare system, it is perhaps understandable that Dr. Frances might struggle to grasp that the real impact of the youth mental health reforms in Australia will be to make psychosocial interventions available to young people with mental ill health to a much greater extent, as both an alternative and complement to medication. A measurable outcome will be less reliance on medication for those accessing care.  (McGorry, 2011, para. 8–9)
What this reveals is that the problem of managing risks is always multi-sided –the risks of the intervention itself (in terms of stigma and unnecessary treatment) are joined with the even less predictable risks posed by the pharmaceutical industry and the model of health care in the United States.  One of the claimed benefits of intervening, at least in Australia, is not merely to prevent psychosis, but to protect children from future pharmaceutical interventions that are inherently more risky and, as they would come later, less efficacious than the non-pharmaceutical interventions McGorry supports.  
	Even if the terms of the debate were not so distorted by clashing worldviews and notions of disorder and probability, McGorry notes that
Evidence will never be conclusive and the perfect truly is the enemy of the good.  The real question is where does the onus of proof lie?  Given the serious and often irreversible personal and social damage wrought by untreated serious mental illness, surely we can assume that late intervention is not a practice we wish to support. (para. 16)
The late modern regime of risk rationality inverts classic ideas of presumption and burden of proof, and McGorry skillfully flips the accusation of risky recklessness back on Frances:
The notion that early diagnosis and treatment should be an optional extra is in any case quite bizarre. Reckless even, given that the lives and futures of young people are at stake. Why do we never see oncologists arguing about the relative value of palliative care and early diagnosis, or insisting that we must have perfect palliative care services before we tackle early intervention? Perhaps it is partly due to the historical neglect of mental health care and our own ambivalence about what we have to offer patients. These are stigma-related issues we must confront. (para. 19)
Even the issue of stigma is redeployed in reverse.  McGorry is not merely a skilled rhetor, he is in tune with the radical reversals that are afforded by the topos of contemporary risk.
	The questions of evidence and burden of proof raise an important question: Why is there not better evidence at this point? Researchers had 'brain wave' data that they believed would prove promising 75 years ago (D. E. Cameron, 1938).  Particularly if the 'prodrome' interpretation is accurate, one would think that with all the neuroimaging techniques that have been developed over the last decade and discussed in Chapter 3, there would be some credible evidence that not only helps us identify people at risk of psychosis earlier and with better accuracy, but would also shed some light on the organic nature of psychotic disorders.  Rose and Abi-Rached (2013) argue:
Despite the penetrating gaze of neuroscience, which has opened up the brain to vision in so many ways... psychiatric classification remains superficial.  The neuromolecular vision seems incapable of grounding the clinical work of psychiatry in the way that has become routine in other areas of medicine... [Although] the [DSM] criteria have summoned up an image of a mental disorder in thought—a specific genetic sequence or set of sequences linked to anomalies in the neurotransmitter system or other aspects of neurobiology causally related to a particular array of cognitive, affective, volitional, or behavioral dysfunctions—this assemblage has proved impossible to summon up in reality, despite the expenditure of millions of dollars and thousands of person-hours. (p. 138)
Perhaps the reaction against psychodynamic nosology, and the concomitant downgrading of trauma, works against these efforts.  None of the major research programs in psychosis risk consider trauma among their principal criteria.  In the drive to overcome mind-body dualism, perhaps the advocates of a neuropsychiatric biomedical nosology have recreated it by not realizing that, if the mind is material, then our ability to observe psychic phenomena in all their rich complexity represents another untapped technique to look at the brain.  Further, if the theory of the prodrome is incorrect—that is, if any observed abnormalities in prepsychotic patients are signs of susceptibility that can be conceptually distinguished from premorbid processes, then perhaps that error places a hard epistemic limit on their research efforts.  	Finally, it strikes me as odd that there has not been more research that attempts to collect some evidence that would be relevant in the debate about what would happen were a diagnosis of psychosis risk utilized by non-experts.  One study examined whether general practitioners could be trained to improve early detection and intervention rates, finding modest support (Power et al., 2007).  But this does not really test the question of how non-experts who do not receive training would use the categories.  Nor has there been any discussion of possible strategies to mitigate this sort of risk (aside from not including psychosis risk syndrome in DSM-5).  In other areas of medicine, there is an awareness that certain treatments require special expertise to avoid pitfalls.  For example, while any physician in the United States can prescribe the opiate buprenorphine off-label, a special waiver from the DEA is required to prescribe it to addicts using it as replacement therapy (Cunningham, Kunins, Roose, Elam, & Sohler, 2007).  The uncertainty associated with permitting non-specialists to use the diagnosis by non-specialists could be managed through a similar scheme, though that would also limit the potential benefits.  Alternatively, a systematic population-level primary/second prevention program could involve non-specialists in screening but not in implementing pharmaceutical interventions without some other verification step.  These ideas may be flawed, but my point is that the controversy seems to be missing this category of harm-mitigation proposals designed to be responsive to the arguments of the other side.
Conclusion
      Having explored the controversy surrounding the diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome, placing it in the wider context of the discourses of risk in advanced liberalism, I can draw two overarching conclusions.  First, building upon the discussion in Chapter 3, I contend that the modern history of psychosis, broadly, or schizophrenia in particular, can be understood as synechdochic of the modern history of risk.  In the previous chapter, I argued that schizophrenia as a diagnostic category enacts the rhetorical discontinuity that characterizes the Kraepelinian nosology, a splitting of the mind on the one hand and a splitting of insanity into discrete disease entities on the other.  Schizophrenia has, since the time it was first formalized as dementia praecox, been defined not so much by currently extant signs and symptoms but by its characteristic progressively deteriorating course.  
      Much like an asset bubble, it cannot be diagnosed with certainty until some time has passed—schizophreniform disorder, as we have seen, is diagnosed when the signs of schizophrenia clear up after a short period of time (Lin, 1988; Troisi, Pasini, Bersani, Mauro, & Ciani, 1991). The diagnosis of schizophrenia is fundamentally concerned with a probable future course of events.  Further, psychosis represents a danger to society to such a degree that psychotic individuals were confined involuntarily to asylums before the discovery of effective neuroleptic medication made outpatient management a realistic option.  The evolution of our conceptualizations of psychosis and schizophrenia track the transformation of the early modern concern with managing dangerousness into the late modern preoccupation with regulating risk.  When dangerousness was seen as a degenerate property potentially living inside the individual subject, the concepts of 'latent schizophrenia' and 'sluggish schizophrenia' came on the scene.  As the larger risk focus transitioned to populations and risk factors, the idea of a psychosis risk syndrome and early interventions on a population deemed to be at ultra-high risk came to fore.  These transitions were not clean, and so much of what bubbled up into controversy was the vestige of competing fragmented regimes of risk rationality, animated by the anxieties of the larger risk society as it was undergoing the reflexive transformations wrought by advanced liberalism.
      The second conclusion I would like to highlight from this analysis is that contested representations of risk, and of the relative importance of different risks, are the sites in which advocates of competing models of madness—and competing institutional logics that govern psychiatry—engage in battle.  Clinicians, journalists, patients, regulators, scientists, and members of the general public each have a distinct understanding of risk that flows from their social location, a situation that at its best can lead to confusion and miscommunication, and at its worst can be deliberately and instrumentally exploited through a program of systematically distorted communication.  
      Technical systems operate according to their own unique instrumental logics, imperatives, and levels of tolerance for uncertainty and risk, and the discourses that circulate throughout can become systematically distorted through the exploitation of deficient integration between systems (Habermas, 1987).  When the effects of this process become publicly salient in the “life-historical background of violated interests and threatened identities,” a public controversy can arise that may provoke legitimation crises for the institutions involved at the intersection of the relevant technical systems (Habermas, 1996, p. 351).  We must understand the controversy about psychosis risk syndrome in this context, that is, as a potential legitimation crisis that relates the institution of psychiatry to the larger risk society in which it is embedded.  
      A common feature of risk legitimation crises – that is, problems that derive from anxieties about the unknown effects of legitimating an instrument that makes authoritative judgments about the unknown – is that there is ambiguity about whether the 'risk problem' at the heart of the crisis is primarily a technical problem or a practical problem.  With respect to psychosis risk syndrome, should the risk problem best be understood as a technical problem, concerned with to what extent we can identify pre-psychotic patients, or as  a practical problem, concerned with to what extent we should attempt to manage risk with this sort of intervention.  We have seen that in the case of coercive paraphilia, this question gets tackled through the combined use of tragic frames in the scientific literature and comedic frames in literature directed toward a public audience.
      Contemporary psychiatry is plagued by a new Oedipal complex – but not as Freud imagined (except insofar as it wants to kill its psychodynamic father while embracing his dimensional spouse).  In Sophocles' classic tragedy, Oedipus does kill his father and sleep with his mother, but the reason he does so is not his unconscious desire.  Rather, his actions resulted from an attempt to avoid a Delphic prophecy that (correctly) identified them as part of his destiny, fated from the beginning.  The controversy about including psychosis risk syndrome in DSM-5 speaks to a profound anxiety about predicting fate, on one hand, and the risks entailed in attempting to thwart fate, on the other.  This is the Oedipus complex that plagues psychiatry today.
CHAPTER FIVE: THAT COMMODIFIED SUPPLEMENT
“Surely the rhetoric of science has devious ways to perform its magic.” – William P. Jones127

“Writing is dangerous from the moment that representation there claims to be presence and the sign of the thing itself.  And there is a fatal necessity, inscribed in the very functioning of the sign, that the substitute make one forget the vicariousness of its own function and make itself pass for the plenitude of a speech whose deficiency and infirmity it nevertheless only supplements.” –Jacques Derrida128

“[The] pharmaceutical marketing departments are actually… post-modernists par excellence.  They treat the human body (including its disorders and complaints) as texts to be interpreted one way this year and in just the opposite way a year or two later.” –David Healy129  

“I sometimes hold it half a sin / To put in words the grief I feel; / For words, like Nature, half reveal / And half conceal the Soul within. / But, for the unquiet heart and brain, / A use in measured language lies; / The sad mechanic exercise, / Like dull narcotics, numbing pain. / In words, like weeds, I'll wrap me o'er, / Like coarsest clothes against the cold: / But that large grief which these enfold / Is given in outline and no more.”– Lord Alfred Tennyson130

***

	This study has identified the polytechtonic elements of contemporary psychiatric nosological controversy through which institutional actors and publics contested DSM-5.  This chapter highlights core contradictions and topics, much of which turns on how the 'normal' is understood as an ideal reference point, a boundary line for illness and the reach of institutional medicine, and a legitimate target of enhancement.  I argue that psychiatric nosological controversy gives rise to a political economy of the supplement which appears to define a work in practice.
	I reviewed with varying depth several core DSM-5 controversies, which concern the revision of the following disorders: conversion disorder; depression and melancholia; dissociative identity disorders; parental alienation syndrome; paraphilic disorders; and psychosis risk syndrome.  The revision of several other diagnostic categories that I did not discuss attracted controversy, especially addiction disorders, autism spectrum disorders, disruptive mood dysregulation disorder, hypersexual disorder, mild neurocognitive disorder, and personality disorders (particularly narcissistic personality disorder).  Nevertheless, the nosological debates (and associated historical trajectories) that I did discuss were motivated by the essential tensions and fissures at work in the entire network of controversy.  My analysis identifies these basic issues, which will continue to enable and constrain controversy and serve as resources for invention as DSM-5 remains contested and development of ICD-11 accelerates.  
	Rather than pursue these controversies in detail, I would like to discuss the current status of DSM-5 (a signifier of psychiatric nosology as it is currently understood) as a politics of the supplement.  The next section identifies key findings that enable this interpretive move.  This is followed by a consideration of how the conditions of late modernity have reconfigured the meaning of psychiatric diagnosis in our psychosis risk society, especially since DSM-III.  I suggest that contemporary nosological controversy should be read in terms of the 'politics of the supplement,' a field of contestation concerning the risks and benefits of the new technologies of the self with which we (re-)define our human nature (Strait & Goodnight, 2012, 2014).  I further argue that psychiatric diagnosis has acquired the form of a commodity and the function of a supplement, neither of which fit the biomedical model of the DSM.  
Key Findings
1. Rhetorical Economy of Science
	Through an examination of the rhetorical forces that animate psychiatric nosological controversies, this dissertation advances a series of arguments about rhetoric's epistemic and cultural functions.  I have argued that psychiatric nosological controversies play out within a rich, historically-informed rhetorical economy that is both self-referential and polytechtonic.  This rhetorical economy gives life to models of pathology, and the nosologies they imply, in two ways.  First, processes of symbolic exchange with a larger cultural system shape the nosological discourses that produce medical knowledge and provide interpretive frameworks for making sense of empirical findings.  Second, conversely, nosological developments provide the rhetorical capital to facilitate symbolic production and consumption within a cultural system, and if these developments are sufficiently revolutionary in scope, they can transform a society's understanding of itself.  These relationships are rhetorical because (a) the system itself persuades individuals to see reality in a certain way; and (b) the system provides the machinery from which persuasive appeals can be constructed, both within a technical system (e.g., scientific interpretations of data) and between technical system and public sphere (e.g., marketing health products to consumers).
2. Residues of the Past Remain
	This study has located controversies within historical periods, visible as both microcosm and macrocosm, showing that the history of medicine consists of “a series of rhetorical problems, situations that call for public persuasion to advance a cause or overcome an impasse… [focusing on] how, and how well, people invented and deployed messages in response to the situation” (Zarefsky, 1998, p. 30).  The past chapters have examined psychosis as an historical situated object of knowledge with quite a few antecedents.  The meanings and implications of psychosis have emerged in a globalized and temporalized rhetorical economy, and at various stages of its development, spurred on by constant developments in our techniques for 'seeing' madness, different conceptual elements and symbolic forms have been incorporated.  Similarly, we have seen that risk has a lengthy history and has acquired quite a bit of internal complexity and richness as both an object of knowledge, a kind of relationship between individual subjects and an array of objects and situations over which humanity has some control, and as an orientation that late modern society, in its self-referentiality, adopts toward itself as it considers its past, present, and future all at once.  
	In their long development, articulations of risk, psychosis, and other concepts have given rise to a discordant mixture of explanatory models and institutional logics, which characterize the contemporary field of psychiatry.  Analysis of the varied DSM-5 controversies suggests that there is no single 'regime of rationality' that governs the DSM as it is understood by those engaged in debates about its revision.  A regime of rationality is inherently rhetorical, as it consists in what the actors involved in a network of controversy regard as “good reasons,” i.e., “those elements that provide warrants for accepting or adhering to the advice fostered by any form of communication that can be considered rhetorical” (Fisher, 1978, p. 378).
Conceptual Cacophony
	Others have noted the “conceptual cacophony” in psychiatry and its many epistemic models (Kecmanovi?, 2011, p. 231).  These models each give different answers to the questions of “who is a patient, what is psychopathology, what is meant by 'normal,' and which treatments are suitable” (McHugh & Slavney, 1983, p. 14).  They are sometimes characterized as “perspectives,” each of which “has its own set of premises, store of facts, modes of research, and methods of treatment” (p. 295).  The term 'perspective' is an apt visual metaphor in this context, for each provides a different way of seeing or point of view, and for that reason, advocates of new perspectives frequently appeal to images and imagery to persuade others of the perspective's value.  
	There are several ways to categorize these different models or perspectives.  One is to distinguish between the medical model, psychological model, and socio-cultural model (Kecmanovi?, 2011).  This division reflects the belief that the causes and processes of mental disorders are multi-factorial, consisting of biological, psychodynamic, and social elements working in tandem.  McHugh and Slavney (1983) distinguish between a disease perspective, dimensional perspective, behavior perspective, and life-story perspective (pp. 15-16).  The disease perspective, simultaneously ontological and physiological, divides pathology into categories based on known or presumed physiological abnormality or dysfunction, linking the concepts of clinical entity, pathological condition, and etiology.  The dimensional perspective assumes that deviation is distributed continuously, quantifying diagnosis by degree rather than clustering by kind.  The behavior perspective predicates abnormality and dysfunction to goal-directed acts, suggesting medical interventions that prevent, stop, or modify the patient's behavior.  The life-story perspective is narrativist, locating mental distress within a chronological arc of contingent and traumatic circumstances, and emphasizing setting, sequence, and outcome.  
	In these different categories, we can see all the classic topics of invention, from definition, principle, genus and species, to signifier and signified, to cause and effect, and to contingency.  The four Aristotelian categories of causality enumerate the different ways the distinct perspectives understand mental illness.  The material cause, “that out of which a thing comes to be, and which persists,” applies to biomedical physiology and genetics (Aristotle, 1941c, sec. 194b24).  Categorical phenomenology views mental disorders in terms of “form or …archetype” (sec. 194b27).   The efficient cause, or “primary source of change or rest,” supplies the logic of biographical trauma (sec. 194b30).  Behavioral teleology emphasizes the final cause, “the end, that for which a thing is done” (sec. 194b33). and the formal cause with behavioral teleology.  As Aristotle noted in his treatise on the soul, the earliest systematic study of psychology, the relationship between mind and body entails multiple levels of causality: The “soul is the cause of its body... in... three senses...  [As] the source or origin of movement, ...the end, ...the essence” (Aristotle, 1941a, sec. 415b10–11).  Many of dialectical pairs—mind and body, syndrome and prodrome, clinical expression and susceptibility, phenotype and genotype—reflect the distinction between act and potency.
	The identity of the patient/subject/self ranges from a material body or “somatic” individual with an epiphenomenal mind (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 26); an immaterial mind (or soul) that possesses a body; as a system in which mind, body, and society interact; as a stable object with accidental characteristics; as a constantly changing collection of processes; as a sum of probabilities drawn from the wider population.  Even within these categories there is further differentiation—the essence of a somatic individual may be anatomical, or genetic, or neurochemical.  Mental illness might be something one possesses, or performs, or that happens to an individual, or that characterizes a patient.  A medical intervention might come in the form of a treatment, or a correction, or an enhancement (p. 17).
Kuhnian Paradigms?
	These divergent models or perspectives are interpretive, but they are also scientific.  There have been efforts to link them with Kuhn's (1962) notion of a paradigm (Asokan, 2009; Corrigan & Penn, 1997; Freedman, 1995; Ghaemi, 2006; Horwitz, 2002; Kendler, 2005).  One problem this approach immediately poses is that for Kuhn, paradigms are hegemonic and mutually exclusive: one replaces another, but they do not exist alongside one another.  The process is uni-directional, not cyclic.  While institutional and political economic factors may favor one over another, no one putative paradigm has rendered its competitors epistemically obsolete.  There are some similarities, of course.  The perspectives are incommensurable.  It is tempting to view the rapid rise of the neo-Kraepelinian biomedical model associated with DSM-III as a 'paradigm shift.'  Like Kuhn's paradigms, the rise and fall of the different perspectives in psychiatry depends upon their ability to produce justifications of favored disciplinary practices.
	Nevertheless, if psychiatry has multiple paradigms, its status as a science is called into question.  Psychiatry could be thought of as pre-scientific, in contrast to other medical disciplines, which are 'mature' sciences.  But to say that psychiatry is 'pre-scientific' is to make a judgment about the future of psychiatry.  Within this orientation, the task of revising DSM is about arriving at that imagined future scientific state.  Psychiatry is just like other fields of medical science, just less advanced.  There is a contradiction in this orientation, which is that those who hold it also think that a mature science of psychiatry will be based on one of the many current paradigms, all of which have already proved themselves inadequate.  The DSM-III Task Force adopted an active etiological nihilism for precisely this reason—but psychiatry failed to become a mature science, which provided the motivation for DSM-5.  At this point, the cacophony itself has become “such a powerful disintegrating force within psychiatry that the future of psychiatry greatly depends on whether psychiatric conceptual heterogeneity will be resolved or at least reduced” (Kecmanovi?, 2011, p. 265).
	Another problem is that the technical problems of psychiatry (e.g., the causes of schizophrenia, or the mechanisms of anti-psychotic medication) are all secondary – none of them are answered by any of the available models.  Rather, the models determine what technical problems can be posed.  Phlogiston theory and caloric theory both concern the phenomenon of combustion, while the perspectives of psychiatry for the most part do not share technical problems.  There are technical problems in fields related to psychiatry that have given rise to competing theories, of course—a classic historic example is the question of whether neurons communicate via chemical or electrical means.131
Polytechtonic History of the Present
	The contribution this study makes to the understanding of psychiatry's theoretical pluralism is to show how the present conceptual soup consists of remixed hybrid rhetorical forms that originated in the long histories of psychiatry, medicine, and health.  In addition to the problems with applying the Kuhnian framework to psychiatry that I have identified, it imposes a logic of history that can only see the past as past.  But as this dissertation demonstrates, everything in the present comes from the past.  As discourses reproduce over time, they survive by adapting, which sometimes entails relocating to another environment.  The various contemporary models or perspectives share common ancestors and rhetorical DNA.  Furthermore, they do not always compete with one another; sometimes, they show up in the same discourse, often without the insight of the speaker.  This can be helpful in forging consensus or in bringing different lines of research and kinds of data together, but it can also obscure understanding.  This problem surfaces in the psychosis risk syndrome controversy, when speakers sometimes jump seamlessly from one interpretation to another, often indirectly, as when addressing problems like 'false positives.'
	Contemporary psychiatric rhetoric includes both historical content as well as historical form.  The former can be seen, for example, in the conceptual fragments of the humoral model which appear in naturopathic marketing appeals and in psychodynamic accounts of the self and its troubles.  An example of the latter is the creation of dementia praecox as a disease construct by Kraepelin, through which illness acquired a diachronic modality.  The rhetorical processes which mediated the development of our modern medical terministic screens were primarily dialectical; epistemic invention typically occurs when interlocutors discover new ways to articulate dissensus.  Our contemporary concepts of psychosis are the result of the projection into the temporal dimension of tensions between discrete and continuous terminologies, ontological and functional interpretations of health and sickness, and psychodynamic and neurobiological descriptions of the mind.
	In our polytechtonic rhetorical economy, even the corpses buried “on the road to modernity” (like the suffix '-mania') have been raised as zombies, neither living nor dead, shuffling through discourse without conscious reflection or awareness (Healy, 1997, p. 33).  Their reanimation follows from the combined action of two figures: metalepsis, which Lundberg (2012) defines as a “substitution of tropes for other tropes” (p. 74), and catachresis, a trope created by “a lexical gap or lacuna” (Posselt, 2005, p. 81).  Quintilian (1998) considered catachresis to be a figure of abuse ('abusio'), though he suggested that it is necessary sometimes when there is no term or appeal that is precisely appropriate in a particular context.  In any event, these catechretic resignifications retain the form but not usually the substantive knowledge they formerly embodied.  A critic can see them only indirectly by looking for anachronistic associational clusters within persuasive scientific appeals.  
	Rhetorical scholarship and critical communication inquiry can powerfully contribute to the burgeoning field of medical humanities.  An archaeological account of the present day tropes, topics, and linguistic structures that are at work in contemporary discourses of mental health can trace some of the rhetorical motives of those who are caught up in such discourses.  The rhetorical assemblages and “genetic arguments” of the past recirculate in the present, making certain insights possible (Gronbeck, 1998, p. 55).  The humoral model of pathology helps explain, for example, the unique clustering of persuasive appeals used to market ‘naturopathic’ nutritional (or magnetic) supplements as a remedy for a somatic imbalance caused by a lack of an essential nutrient and/or a surplus of some toxin (a preservative, dye, ‘chemical,’ heavy metal, radiation, etc.): These appeals capitalize on “our seemingly innate desire to regulate our internal balance with a range of vitamins, minerals, tonics, herbals, and other compounds” (Healy, 1997, p. 10).  
	My synopsis of the history of medicine leading up to the birth of psychiatry provides helpful context for critically theorizing contemporary psychiatric science.  We can see that humorism lives on in contemporary orthodox scientific theories of mental illness, particularly when rendered for a lay audience, that feature vital chemicals (sometimes explicitly called “neurohumors”) in the brain in a state of ‘imbalance.’  Schildkraut’s (1967) catecholamine hypothesis of affective disorders provides one example.  The dopamine and glutamate hypotheses of schizophrenia provide two more.  This phenomenon speaks to the socially situated nature of knowledge production in late twentieth century biological psychiatry (Giarman, 1959, p. 73; Haraway, 1991; Solomon, 2008).  The waxing and waning of appeals to the image and to the exemplar case correspond with the emergence and subsequent mainstreaming of new technologies that enable morbidity to be seen and named in novel ways.
      How should we understand the contemporary hybridized appeals in relation to the earlier models and theories from which they derive?  Perhaps as descendants of a long deceased ancestor, from whom these newly born means of persuasion inherited their ‘rhetorical DNA.’  This metaphor certainly resonates with the current popularity of the gene as the fundamental unit of biopolitical reality, but it does not seem very faithful to the humoral reasoning for which it attempts to account.  Instead, I propose that the humoral model is frankly psychotic, suffering from a loosening of associations between the fragments of its once unitary rhetorical psyche.  
      Whenever we see humoral appeals at work, they are untempered by one another, no longer mixed in any sort of balanced fashion.  This can be seen in the persecutory delusions of holistic medical appeals that depict disease as the result of a vast conspiracy by the forces of industrial modernity to saturate the human body with artificial chemicals while preventing its proper nourishment.  Invariably, the pharmaceutical industry is involved in this ominous plot, working to suppress the truth about health.  Humoral psychosis also explains the hallucinations of the Amen clinic, which, in SPECT images, sees subtypes of mental disorders that no one else can see.  Displaying alogia, the humoral model does not announce its presence explicitly in these appeals.  Perhaps I am overstating the case, pushing the idea farther than the evidence supports, misinterpreting random rhetorical noise as humoral signal.  But if so, are these not ‘ideas of reference’ emanating from the humoral appeals that have animated this inquiry?
	By examining persuasive systems of meaning within the historical context of reproduction, I have shown not only what is old and recirculated in contemporary mental health controversies, but also what is novel.  The dialectical line of conceptual development, and the arguments surrounding points of consciousness shifting, enable a rhetorical genealogy, a “history of the present” (Foucault, 1977, p. 31).  This approach is aimed at reconstructing “discursive practices in so far as they give rise to a corpus of knowledge, in so far as they assume the status and role of a science” (Foucault, 1972, p. 190).  Current controversies and practices reproduce the conditions of psychiatric rhetorical invention.  They mediate discursive contests over the conflicting orders of motivation that arrange the ideas and values of science hierarchically, prioritizing some principles over others.  Is reliability prior to validity?  Is epidemiology more important than clinical practice?  Is a Type I error more costly than a Type II error?  What role should (presumed) etiology and pathogenesis play in the way we classify mental illness?  Do illnesses exist independently from their physiological effects, and does this matter for the scientific process or to therapeutic outcomes?  Controversies about models, distinctions, and priorities of science reveal the power struggle between dominant and alternative approaches.  
	A major stasis point in the meta-theoretical debates of psychiatric nosology is Cartesian mind-body dualism.  In a variety of different contexts, we have seen defenders of a biomedical or neuropsychiatric approach decry the dualist views of their opponents.  Presumably, then, neuropsychiatry would conceive of the mind and brain as a unified hybrid in which anything true of one has some correlate on the other.  Yet in every case when this objection has been raised, what is actually under attack is the idea of conceiving of the mind at all.  This view is just as dualist—it just adds a strange mental nihilism to the dualism.  Truly working past the mind-brain dichotomy would entail recognizing that mental or psychological phenomena are in fact also brain phenomena, and therefore extremely important units of analysis for whoever would apply technical expertise to intervene on the brain.  Such a move might open up new psychopharmacological models in which psychodynamic tensions and structures are given neurochemical meaning.  But what I want to underscore is that controversies over mind-brain problems in DSM-5 seem to unfold without any of the participants displaying any insight into the contradictory nature of their polemics.
3. Configurations of Knowledge Transcend Psychiatry
      An archaeological history of this sort contributes to an understanding of the contemporary episteme, the set of knowledge practices that imposes “a certain structure of thought that the [people] of a particular period cannot escape,” the “constantly moving set of articulations, shifts, and coincidences that are established, only to give rise to others… [which] makes it possible to grasp the set of constraints and limitations which, at a given moment, are imposed on discourse” (Foucault, 1972, pp. 191–192).  I have argued that, throughout history, the dominant ideas about the health of the individual are closely connected to the dominant ideas about the health of society, and this connection often appears most clearly in the figures of rhetoric.  The humoral model of pathology endured for millennia because it functioned as cultural system and ultimate terministic order.  It resonated with the concerns and lifeworld of its time, and to some extent continues to resonate today.  Contemporary nosological controversies are manifestations of the anxieties, contradictions, hopes, and possibilities of the period that Giddens (1990) calls ‘late modernity.’132  	
      Contemporary scientific deliberation about the nature and division of madness bears the rhetorical signature of late modernity, and DSM-5 bears the imprint of this signature.  The manifold hybrid rhetorical forms that constitute the polytechtonic structure of contemporary psychiatric scientific discourse can live in relative harmony for a time.  Inconsistencies and contradictions built into these hybrid forms pose no insurmountable problem so long as they are sufficient to satisfy the needs of scientists, clinicians, and the mental health industry.  The attempt to unify these nosological discourses into a single common language institutionalized in the DSM stirs up sediment, making evident problems that had otherwise been overlooked.  
	What assemblages, forms, motives, and institutional arrangements influence the dominant configurations of knowledge in late modern society? Psychosis, as we have seen, has many meanings, and even excluding those currently not in use today, the concept encompasses a wide variety of phenomena.  One fairly consistent feature of psychosis is the disconnection from reality that it represents, whether that reality be subjective, intersubjective, or objective.  As our understanding of the risks we face and can manage medically has shifted from elements of danger inhering inside individuals to impersonal probability distributions associated with risk factors at the population level, the concept of risk has become both less and more real – less real because it is more mathematical and less material, but more real because its potential consequences are extremely serious, ever present in our lifeworld, and consequential for us simply as risk (that is, independent of the effects of the dangers for which we are at risk, risk itself directly bears on our life).  In a figurative sense, our experience of risk is itself psychotic, at least partially.  Further, the dimensional understanding of medical risk syndromes means that, to a certain extent, we are all at some level of risk of some mental illness, as well as at risk of the iatrogenic effects of unnecessarily intervening to reduce that risk.  
	These factors work together to make our society a 'psychosis risk society.'  Our efforts to problematize and manage risk is the source of our largest risks.  Risk management presumes that humanity can reflexively intervene rationally, but the specter of adverse effects and unintended consequences calls into question that assumption.  Consequently, we can never be sure about whether our risk management activities, which we regard as necessary, are expedient.  Additionally, our society consists of many individual risk consumers, underscoring the degree to which risk management has been subsumed under the logic of neo-liberalism.  We see a loosening of associations between risk communities.  Rose (2007) suggests that in “a regime of fragmented communities of risk, private insurance no longer redistributes accident to mitigate the arbitrariness of fate and the hazards that, but for the grace of God, may face us all” (p. 124).  Furthermore, due to the cacophony of theoretical perspectives in psychiatry, the terms of pathology that organize the strategies with which we govern risk are themselves disorganized.  The result is confusion, anger, and fear.
	Temporal logic organized psychotic phenomena under the category of dementia praecox.  It was the first diagnosis that found unity in its (pessimistic) temporal arc.  After diagnosing dementia praecox or, later, schizophrenia, the subsequent treatment (or confinement), was both a medical intervention and a risk management strategy.  Psychosis risk just moves the the timeline back, allowing for an earlier (and hopefully more efficacious) intervention.  Our understanding of other psychiatric diagnoses is increasingly influenced by a concern for risk.  Depression in some cases may be a “prodrome to dementia” or a “prodrome to Alzheimer's disease” (Stahl, 2008, pp. 912, 914).  It also is a prodrome to more intense depression: “The hope is that recognition and treatment of both unipolar and bipolar depressions, causing all symptoms to remit for long periods of time, might prevent progression to more difficult states” (p. 473).  Similarly, premenstrual dysphoric disorder is “important not only for the symptoms [it causes] in the short run, but also for the risk [it represents] for a full recurrence in the future, signaling the potential need for both symptomatic and preventive treatment” (p. 617).  Some suggest that inducing the
remission of symptoms of any psychiatric disorder with psychopharmacological treatments [might] prevent disease progression, possibly by preventing the plastic changes in brain circuits that fully establish and worsen psychiatric disorders.  In schizophrenia, therefore, the question is whether “prophylactic” antipsychotics can keep an individual from “catching” schizophrenia. (p. 438)
Here, we see the influence of pharmaceutical reason.  In all these cases, healing present distress seems almost an afterthought to the possibility of preventing future distress.  
	A review of the decisions to adopt certain diagnostic ideas, nosological vocabularies, and systems of measurement in DSM sheds light on the 'microphysics of power,' “the complex of relays and interdependencies which enable programmes of government to act upon and intervene upon those places, persons and populations which are their concern” (P. Miller & Rose, 1990, p. 8).  This is particularly evident in the DSM-5 Task Force's implicit concern about civil commitment that lurks behind the presentation of paraphilic disorders, as well as in the profound anxieties expressed about the consequences of reifying the diagnostic category of psychosis risk such that it could influence external institutional processes.  But it also speaks to a wider cultural drive to preemptively eliminate threats, whether by military invasion, preventive detention (and associated 'enhanced interrogation' techniques), brokering climate-related treaty agreements, health screening via imaging or genetic testing, etc.  Susceptibility is a commonplace by which an institution can expand the circumference of its reach; in medicine, it leads to “the sense that some, perhaps all, persons, though existentially healthy are actually asymptomatically or pre-symptomatically ill” (N. S. Rose, 2007, p. 19).
	Finally, a psychosis risk society ignores actual risks when it medicalizes social hazards.  Such efforts “[direct] attention away from stresses caused by the technological society in which we live and related social, economic, and political arrangements such as increased bureaucratization” (Gambrill, 2012, p. 169).  Brody reminds us that “[attention] to smaller waistlines, quieter children and better erections, occurs in the context of 47 million Americans who go without health insurance” (Brody, 2008, p. 241).  A general attitude of paranoia about risk factors and possible symptoms leads to “self-medicalization,” a self-directed surveillance project characteristic of a communication control society (Conrad, 2005).
4. DSM-5 Anxieties: Pharma and the Medicalization of Normality
	This study's analysis of DSM-5 controversies points to two overriding anxieties that bubble up in the discussion of virtually every contested nosological category: the pharmaceutical industry's influence and the medicalization of normality.  Concerns about the former have two sources.  The first is the not especially credible anti-psychiatry movement, which is frequently associated with Scientology and widely viewed as fringe.  The second source is much more credible: psychiatrists themselves.  The debate about transparency highlighted in Chapter 1 was the work of two very high profile psychiatrists, Allen Frances and Robert Spitzer.  Others, like David Healy, have been sounding the alarm for a while.  
	Notably missing from this list are patients, those most directly affected by the potential hazards of pharmaceutical products. Patients organize as patients in biosocial communities (Rabinow, 1996).  They direct activism toward goals like increased access to treatment and eliminating stigma.  This cluster of interests aligns with the interests of the pharmaceutical industry, and so these organizations play a role in 'disease awareness' activism and other pharmaceutical marketing campaigns (S. P. R. Rose, 2005).  The National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI) is primarily funded by the pharmaceutical industry (Harris, 2009).  Largely for this reason, most of the criticism of the influence of the industry comes from non-patient sources.  
	The second concern, over the medicalization of normality, is related the first, because critics see a profit motive in this medicalization.  Allen Frances's criticism of DSM-5 culminated in 2013 with the publication of his book Saving Normal.  If normal requires saving, we must know what is normal.  Paula Caplan, a psychiatrist involved with the DSM-III Task Force and major critic of DSM-5, argued that normal is notoriously elusive:  
Ask ten people whether the object in the middle of your kitchen is a table, and chances are they will unanimously agree that it is.  But ask ten people—even ten therapists—whether any particular person is normal and, if not, why they consider the person to be abnormal, and you will almost certainly get a large number of quite different replies...  [There] is no clear, 'real thing' to which the 'normality' label necessarily corresponds.  (Caplan, 1995, pp. 33–34)
Perhaps this lack of consensus is why there is so much resistance against perceived encroachments on normality, particularly given that the “right granted to the psychiatric profession to name the 'normal' also has immense powers to modify behavior...  [The DSM] may have influenced more behavior in our current society than the Ten Commandments” (Gaylin, 2009, p. 15).  This power is a double-edged sword, however, because individuals cannot undergo enhancement without first articulating what is missing or incomplete.  For the vast majority of the public whose potential interactions with psychiatry are consensual, any restrictions on the ability to classify as pathological what some believe is normal constitute a barrier between patients and treatment.  
	Enhancement is the other side of susceptibility, and it comes into play as psychiatry moves “from normalization to customization... [which] is often part of the commodification and fetishization of health products and services common in the biomedicalization era” (Clarke, Shim, Mamo, Fosket, & Fishman, 2003, p. 181).  Hacking (2005) suggests that lifestyle drugs, cosmetic surgery, and the ability to replace organs work to reinforce a Cartesian view in which our bodies are just appendages to the true inner self.  On the other hand, cosmetic psychopharmacology suggests that in some cases, our mental states are also external weights on the true self, that can be revealed only with medication.  Peter Kramer (1993) famously asked about 'Tess,' his patient:
Might Tess, absent the invention of the modern antidepressant, have lived her whole life—a successful life, perhaps, by external standards—and never been herself?  ...This is... a question... of having located a self that feels true, normal, and whole, and of understanding medication to be an occasionally necessary adjunct to the maintenance of that self. (pp. 19-20)
If not our bodies, and not our psyches, where is the late modern self?  To answer this question, I must now address the politics of the supplement.
Politics of the Supplement
	The politics of the supplement fit into the larger category of 'life politics,' “a politics of self-actualization in a reflexively ordered environment, where that reflexivity links self and body to systems of global scope,” in which the meaning of risk and its attendant burdens of proof are contested, and where market forces, scientific expertise, and other intersecting institutional influences “intrude deeply into the reflexive project of the self” as it is carried out at the material level (Giddens, 1991, p. 214).  The politics of the supplement give rise to and sustain rhetorics that address questions of information, persuasion and entertainment by entwining desire, risk-engagement, and satisfaction in individual and collective contexts of morbidity and mortality.  Supplements are material and symbolic surpluses that promise to overcome lack through improving the security of living, aid in coping with chronic impairment, or retard undignified outcomes of mortality.  
	The politics of the supplement play out in contests over the material relation of state-of-the-art practices to adverse outcomes, and how key agents (regulatory, with the public; scientific, with other scientists; and clinical, with patients) should communicate about the associated risks and benefits. Despite the pervasive presence of psychiatric medication in the popular imaginary, the public is woefully misinformed about their mechanisms of action and the array of potential benefits and risks (Blease, 2013; Glazer, 2013; Lacasse & Leo, 2005; J. Leo & Lacasse, 2013). Adverse outcomes can be contextualized either as expected and bad, but understood relative to the outcome of inaction, or as self-serving risks in which costs are born by one group while profits are enjoyed by another.  
	The contested framing of the risks of state-of-the-art practices occurs at “a crucial nexus between the scientific and public spheres [which] exists precisely at those points where scientific theories and research programs have implications for prevalent world views, ideologies, and practical social policies” (Czubaroff, 1997, p. 52).  If judgments about the risks and benefits of diagnostic practices are to be informed by public deliberation, the potential for that deliberation to be distorted by pseudo-controversy constitutes a threat to public health, as in the case of the controversy about iatrogenic suicidality as an adverse effect of anti-depressants (Healy, 2000a, 2004a, 2011; Strait & Goodnight, 2014).  Thus, this concluding chapter extends inquiry into “the conditions that contribute to the ripeness of a controversy and the possibility of disingenuous controversy that closes off, rather than expands, argumentative space” (Fritch, Palczewski, Farrell, & Short, 2006, p. 192).  
	But the politics of the supplement call into question the categories of health and illness in the first place.  Consider that approximately 70% of Americans take at least one prescription medication every day, and more than half take at least two different categories of medication – and this does not include drugs, vitamins, or herbs that can be obtained over the counter (Zhong et al., 2013).  Such a state of affairs precludes an understanding of health as the normal or typical condition of the body, or as the mere absence of major disease.  Instead, health has been transformed into a Platonic ideal, an hypothetical condition of perfection, total freedom from dysfunction or defect.  Psychiatric nosological controversies, as well as those (related) controversies about specific psychiatric treatment techniques, arise from the ambiguities, tensions, and slippages in the meanings we as a society assign to our diagnostic and therapeutic concepts.  These together constitute the polysemic grounding for the neurotic fascination with the possibility to reshape our human nature pill by pill that compulsively intrudes upon the popular biopolitical imaginary.  It is in this discursive environment that medical controversies get hashed out, and the semiotic ambiguity that runs through the biomedical conceptual corpus also permeates our words for communicating and contesting uncertainty and risk.
Humoral Supplement for the Inhuman
	A risk society manages the anxieties that it creates by identifying perceived deficiencies (and excesses, which seamlessly translate into deficiencies with respect to a supplement) that can be ameliorated through supplementation.  When supplementation fails, there can be a great deal of uncertainty about whether the supplementation was insufficient or excessive.  An awareness that the most serious risks we face as a society are those we had a hand in creating (e.g., nuclear war, global warming, economic depression) only intensifies the anxieties of risk management.  As serious as these impersonal risks are, the risks entailed in the reflexive projects of the self pose existential threats to the individual person in a way that is uniquely and profoundly disturbing.
	The discursive framework in which an individual subject views the self as containing an incomplete human nature requiring supplementation is a distinctive feature of late modernity.  Lyotard (1991) argues:
That children have to be educated is a circumstance which only proceeds from the fact that they are not completely led by nature, not programmed. The institutions which constitute culture supplement this native lack.  What shall we call human in humans, the initial misery of their childhood, or their capacity to acquire a 'second' nature which... makes them fit to share in... adult consciousness and reason? (p. 3-5).  
He goes on to suggest that human nature, which enables individuals to participate in contemporary society, is something an individual acquires within institutions.  Importantly, before the project begins, the unlimited human potential of the pre-institutionalized child represents a sort of perfection that will always be pursued incompletely, an inhumanity that will never be completely resisted:
Shorn of speech, incapable of standing upright, hesitating over the objects of its interest, not able to calculate its advantages, not  sensitive to common reason, the child is eminently the human because its distress heralds and promises things possible.  Its initial delay in humanity, which makes it the hostage of the adult community, is also what manifests to this community the lack of humanity it is suffering from, and which calls on it to become more human… That it always remains for the adult to free himself or herself from the obscure savageness of childhood by bringing about its promise—that is precisely the condition of humankind... [Since] the politics which ‘we’ have inherited from revolutionary modes of thought and actions now turns out to be redundant, …what else remains as ‘politics’ except resistance to this inhuman? (pp. 3-7).
This political resistance to the 'inhuman' is life politics.  An individual’s reflexive self-project, the process of completing one’s human nature, is always an incomplete project.  Furthermore, the institutions of late modernity are what humanize us through their supplementarity.  
	To humanize implies an understanding of the 'normal' human.  As I have argued, a common theme in the DSM-5 controversies is anxiety over the potential medicalization of normal variation.  The normal needs no supplement.  By defining normality, the DSM serves as an apparatus through which institutional psychiatry can supplement our human nature.  The DSM nosology gives names to all the potential defects in our personalities, our desires, our moods, our beliefs, our conduct.  Discovering an applicable diagnosis is not a matter of awareness, but of supplementation, for the diagnosis names our defect, accounts for it, and opens us up to proper treatment, whatever that might be.  As a “surplus or supplement whose political force derives from the sense in which it evades recuperation by instrumental use or determinate meaning,” a psychiatric diagnosis transcends this medical relationship (Carroll, 2008, p. 178).  This is even the case for a diagnosis like psychosis risk syndrome, which points to a risk that has no stable realist meaning and which cannot be eliminated instrumentally—only manipulated, an ever risky endeavor.  But to a certain extent, any supplement qua supplement is a fuzzy carrier of meaning.
Writing as Supplement
	The original supplement is writing, which supplements oral communication.  Speech signifies reason; writing signifies speech.  Its dangerousness comes from the fact that “the substitute [makes] one forget the vicariousness of its own function and [makes] itself pass for the plenitude of a speech whose deficiency and infirmity it nevertheless only supplements” (Derrida, 1974, p. 144, emphasis in original).  We have already seen many of the problems posed by writing vis-à-vis speech.  Chapter 1 described the way in which DSM-III marked the terminology of psychodynamic nosology in order to protect psychiatry from dangerous written words like 'neuroses' and 'reaction.'  I also described the enormous lengths to which the DSM-5 Task Force went to restrict the written communication of its members outside institutionally sanitized venues.  Chapter 2 presented two kinds of rhetorical memory, anamnesis and hypomnesis.  Anamnesis, the living memory, lives in speech, but can easily become hypomnesis when fixed into a written text.  Thus Socrates disparages the speech of Lysias that Phaedrus memorized verbatim.  Chapter 3 showed how the humoral architectonic broke up after it became ossified in the medical textbooks of the middle ages, transformed into a non-falsifiable fundamentalism.  Humoral explanations of the action of cinchona illustrate that, as an epistemic community, medicine had effectively become psychotic—that is, it had completely lost its capacity for reality testing.  In this sense, the accumulation of anomalies that produces what Kuhn calls a paradigm in crisis may be the symptoms of something like a psychosis risk syndrome for an epistemic community.  Chapter 4 referenced the esotericism of Clement of Alexandria.  The framers of DSM-5 made use of the esoteric rhetorical form in their approach to the paraphilic disorders.  Their challenge was to communicate the essence of the message to clinicians without creating dangerous words of power that attorneys could exploit in presenting an insanity defense or in pursuing civil commitment of a 'sexually violent predator' or 'psychopath.'  The chapter also examined the potential risks entailed in recognizing the diagnosis of psychosis risk syndrome.  Its placement in the chapter for diagnoses requiring further study was a compromise move which committed the knowledge to writing, but then neutered those words.  
	All of these examples, in different ways, speak to an awareness of the dangers of writing, particularly the institutional writing of the DSM text.  In a way, the published discourses of scientific research have a speech-like character, in that it is constantly flowing, with each speaker responding in turn to her colleagues.  The constant updating of knowledge prevents any single article or finding from attaining a standardized, authoritative status that would supplement the living epistemic discourses of scientific research.  Yet the DSM does standardize and freeze certain symbols, by which it refers to the state of knowledge (as judged by consensus).  This is the danger in using the DSM to advance a scientific agenda:
But the supplement supplements.  It adds only to replace.  It intervenes or insinuates itself in-the-place-of; if it fills, it is as if one fills a void.  If it represents and makes an image, it is by the anterior default of a presence. (Derrida, 1974, p. 145)
This points to a basic epistemic question about the validity of updating the DSM because of scientific need.  This line of reasoning presumes, on one hand, that the DSM is responsible for productive scientific work, but then, on the other hand, presumes that we can make judgments about the epistemic usefulness of the current edition of the DSM based on findings from research carried out under its regime.  Either the DSM does not in fact hold science back, or it does not, but in neither case does it follow that the DSM should be changed in light of scientific findings.  The only sensible way this argument could be made is if we realized that our nosology was useless, and reflecting on that fact, decided to radically change the DSM, hoping for the best but unguided by research findings which, according to the justification for consulting them, are untrustworthy to be consulted.  Yet this problem is mystified to some extent by the DSM's supplemental status, mediating an epistemology it would supervene.
Diagnosis as Supplement
	A psychiatric diagnosis derives its symbolic power and importance in part from its ability to elude determinate meaning.  It also derives power from the exigency which gave it rise—uncertainty about a health problem, an inability to see the source of distress: “One goes from blindness to the supplement.  But the blind person cannot see, in its origin, the very thing he produces to supplement his sight” (p. 149).  This is why, as we saw in Chapter 2, those urging the adoption of a new symbolic order appeal to the visual: Hippocrates, Linnaeus, Esquirol, Pharma, molecular neuropsychiatrists, the promoters of brain imaging technology for diagnostic purposes.  It also explains the diagnosis of 'psychosis risk syndrome' – something we desperately want to see is future illness, and specifically, future psychosis.  We cannot see it; we are blind to it.  The diagnosis of psychosis risk supplements that blindness—but tragically, we cannot see psychosis risk itself, at least not reliably and certainly not as a prodrome. The risk is that, in our blindness to the supplement, we embrace it as a reification.
	Contemporary risks are high stakes, and unavoidable—our actions to avoid one risk produces another.  Furthermore, all psychiatric diagnoses manage risk to some extent.  Schizophrenia, as we've seen in Chapter 3, is defined by its inevitable downward trajectory.  Diagnosing schizophrenia is a judgment that the patient is at high risk of terminal decline.  Depression is a suicide / self-harm risk syndrome.  With the exception of the acutely agitated who require immediate medication, contemporary psychiatric diagnosis is made with an eye to future risk.  But the diagnosis itself, along with the treatments that it authorizes, carry serious risks as well.  As Derrida (1974) explains,
When the supplement accomplishes its office and fills the lack, there is no harm done. The abyss is the chasm which can remain open between the lapse of Nature and the delay of the supplement… The play of the supplement is indefinite.  References refer to references… But when, by a return of catastrophe, society is degraded, nature can substitute itself for its supplement.  It is then a bad nature… This play of the supplement [entails] the always open possibility of a catastrophic regression and the annulment of progress. (p. 298)
Iatrogenic suicidality, a potential side-effect of antidepressants, exemplifies this unfortunate way to lose the game of the supplement.  The spontaneous emergence of violent fantasies, sometimes leading to suicidal acts, represents the deepest anxieties one can have concerning a mood supplement.  The reflexive project of the self is not simply side-tracked, but completely derailed with the auto-destruction of the self.  But there are other less tragic examples of supplemental intervention that backfires.  Common situations include the patient diagnosed with ADHD whose attention span is worse than it was before the start of chronic treatment with psychostimulant drugs, or the patient diagnosed with an anxiety disorder who becomes dependent on benzodiazapines and suffers from rebound anxiety.
Rhetorical Commodities
	Many of the dangers posed by the supplement are due to its ability to facilitate reification, a severe form of alienation in which abstract social relationships are objectified.  Marx (1906) illustrated this phenomenon by distinguishing between the exchange value and use value of a commodity.  For individuals in a society characterized by a market economy, the value or worth of a commodity is not determined by its intrinsic utility, but by its relative potential to be exchanged for other commodities.  Productive forces and relations conspire to transform the subject into an object:  “Labor produces not only commodities; it produces itself and the worker as a commodity” (Marx, 1964, p. 107).  The critique of mass culture takes this one step further—culture came to exist only in “commodity form . . . Exchange value, not truth value, counts.  On it centers the rationality of the status quo, and all alien rationality is bent to it” (Marcuse, 1964, p. 57).  The exchange of labor power for variable capital, mediated through the “cultural dynamics of representation,” makes a fundamentally irrational and alienating system intelligible to its participants (Greene, 2004, p. 193).
	Habermas (1987) found the critique of mass culture of his forebears to be overly pessimistic and insufficiently nuanced.  He argued that by retaining the conceptual elements of the labor theory of value while eschewing Marx's theory of history in favor of “pseudonormative propositions concerning an objective teleology in history” (p. 382), the early Frankfurt School intellectuals had “blinded themselves to the realities of a developed capitalism based on the pacification of class conflict through welfare-state measures” (p. 334).  The labor theory of value is enthymematic, relying upon the equation of rationalization and reification, resulting in a myopic view of the historical development of media-steered subsystems.  Acting as a terministic screen, the Marxist language of value reveals in the destruction of traditional forms of life the institutionalization of a new class relationship, but it conceals other aspects of the increasing differentiation of the symbolic structures of the lifeworld (the taken-for-granted social reality of everyday life) and the reification of post-traditional forms of life (Burke, 1969b; Strait, 2011).  The communication processes emerging in an increasingly rationalized lifeworld present new opportunities for social solidarity.  Critical theorists can provide a foundation for those seeking to achieve progressive social change through public argumentation only by discovering “the conditions for recoupling a rationalized culture with an everyday communication dependent on vital traditions” (p. 356).  This marks a shift from early Frankfurt School thinkers, for whom nothing positive ever results from the reconfiguration of the lifeworld by the autonomous systems of the capitalist economy or the administrative state.
	My reading of the DSM revision process is read as a steering mechanism by which the relationship between theory and praxis may be reconfigured around a new set of institutional logics.  Psychiatric diagnoses function as “symbolic tokens,” which for Giddens operate alongside an expert system and function as “media of exchange which have standard value, and thus are interchangeable across a plurality of contexts” (Giddens, 1991, p. 18).  The exchange-value of psychiatric diagnoses has, I suggest, surpassed their use-value.  Once valued for its use in the clinic and the lab, a psychiatric diagnosis is now a valuable commodity that can be exchanged for the right to purchase a prescription medicine or to be reimbursed for psychotherapy.  It also provides an identity that may be less stigmatizing than its non-medical alternative.  In all these ways, a diagnosis has value as a supplement through exchange.  
	It is important to note that this process has both positive and negative aspects, as psychiatric nosological categories have the capacity to improve public communication by contextualizing processes of reaching mutual understanding about matters of psychopathology, but can also concentrate those processes, particularly in the domain of legal justice, to “take the place of those communication structures that had once made possible public discussion and self-understanding by citizens and private individuals” (Habermas, 1994, p. 389).  Lifeworld rationalization also has the potential to create new opportunities for social solidarity, even amidst the increasing tensions of alienation, technocratic obscurantism, and pharmaceutical propaganda.
	In the globalized economy of late capitalism, the supplement is a commodity and the patient is a consumer.  There is also a certain symmetry between the supplemental politics surrounding technologies of the self and the consumer politics of the commodity.  They are two sides of the same coin, both encompassed in 'life politics,' as contrasted with emancipatory politics:
While emancipatory politics is a politics of life chances, life politics is a politics of lifestyle. Life politics is the politics of a reflexively mobilised order - the system of late modernity - which, on an individual and collective level, has radically altered the existential parameters of social activity. It is a politics of self-actualisation in a reflexively ordered environment, where that reflexivity links self and body to systems of global scope ... Life politics concerns political issues which flow from processes of self-actualisation in post-traditional contexts, where globalising influences intrude deeply into the reflexive project of the self, and conversely where processes of self-realisation influence global strategies. (p. 214).
One pursues self-actualization through consumption.  This state of affairs evolved over time, as consumer politics emerged from the successive waves of emancipatory politics that came before it.  
	The Consumer/Survivor/Ex-Patient (c/s/x) movement developed in the last twenty-five years, and just as an institution can evolve by resolving its rhetorical contradictions, the consumer movement was able to accept the anti-psychiatric arguments about the socially constructed nature of mental illness as a category and the survivor's movement's criticism of the 'patient' as an identity.   At the same time, it internalized the institutional response that involved demonstration of the biological nature of mental disorders and the efficacy of its treatments, a response that justified the status of the patient as a patient interacting with a doctor by means of a medical relationship (Coleman, 2008; Crossley, 2006; Farber, 2012; Lewis, 2006; Morrison, 2005; Staub, 2011).  Coinciding with the movement, the direct-to-consumer advertising of psychiatric medication appealed to consumers' desire to determine their consumption of psychiatric goods on their own, as well as their belief that psychiatric products were valuable means by which one may improve both physically and mentally.  The individuals involved in the c/s/x movement are motivated to demonstrate that they have “a rational capacity to speak credibly about their condition and their treatment, and even to comment on the science of psychiatry” (Coleman, 2008, p. 341).  Many of them accept that psychiatrists are experts capable of improving their lives, but mental health consumers approach them as clients rather than as patients.  This move works against the stigma associated with the medicalization of mental health as it alters the power relationship between doctor and patient within which the patient is more of an object than a participant, with little to no agency.  The movement gained legitimacy by pointing to the scientific evidence published in medical journals, the mass media of psychiatry, that indicates that empowerment and feelings of agency amplified other psychiatric treatments to effectively treat patients.  
	The biomedical reality of mental disorders as discrete disease entities provides legitimation for psychiatry as a medical specialty.  More than standing in opposition to the way in which psychiatrists used the ontology of mental illness, which no longer had much meaning or power over them since they no longer identified themselves as patients, members of the c/s/x movement instead turned to public diplomacy, as “language and subjectivity were now hailed as the key terrain of struggle.  It is perhaps not surprising then that the approach... [focused] upon listening and speaking, making testimony and putting one's experience in words” (Crossley, 2006, pp. 206–207).  A hallmark of life-politics, these movements reflexively turned both inward and outward at the same time, rhetorically situating themselves as sovereign agents without self-pity or feelings of persecution.  They developed a symbolic order in which they could communicate with one another and with the public along with psychiatrists on terms with which they were comfortable.
	The influence of the consumer movement is visible in the draft of hypersexual disorder, a diagnosis that ultimately did not make it into the book but was passionately debated.  The proposed rationale explicitly invokes the language of consumption:
There is a significant clinical need, even a “demand” from mental health consumers, for mental health providers to recognize and diagnose a distinct group of men and women who have been seeking and are already receiving mental health care such as individual psychotherapy, 12-step group support, pharmacotherapy, and specialized residential treatments. These men and women are presenting to clinicians because of recurrent, “out of control” sexual behaviors that are not inherently socially deviant (i.e., normophilic, not paraphilic). Persons afflicted with these conditions are currently diagnosed as Sexual Disorder Not Otherwise Specified, a diagnostic wastebasket that the DSM-V editors would like to see diminished in scope. Clinical and research-based interest in this set of problematic nonparaphilic sexual behaviors is sufficiently established to have birthed a peer-reviewed journal published since 1990 dedicated exclusively to research and treatment of “sexual addiction/ compulsivity.” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010e, para. 1)
In this way, responsiveness to those who are help-seeking becomes consumerist criterion to define pathology, one that, as we saw in the controversy over psychosis risk syndrome, has some potential to insulate risk from criticism.  Further, the specialized nature of the consumer demand seems to imply something deficient in the NOS “diagnostic wastebasket.” Future research should identify relationships and dependencies between c/s/x rhetorical forms and those appearing in the justificatory literature of institutional psychiatry.
Postpsychiatric Rhetorical Inquiry  
	This dissertation highlights the relevance of rhetorical hermeneutics to the medical humanities, and more broadly raises issues of significance for the fields of science, technology, & society (STS) and communication.  It also demonstrates how rhetorical inquiry can contribute to the fields of medical humanities and what Bradley Lewis has termed “postpsychiatric studies” (Lewis, 2006, p. 16).  Lewis suggests that the social study of psychiatry lacks a theoretical foundation:
[A] theorized postpsychiatry would draw on the resources from poststructuralism, postmodernism, and cultural studies.  Postpsychiatry would be poststructural in that it would take seriously the role of language and power in shaping psychiatric thought and perception, and it would devote as many resources to working through theories of language and power as the new psychiatry currently spends on working through statistical science and neuropharmacology.  Postpsychiatry would be postmodern in that it would work without the psuedo-certainties of modernist science and reason... Finally, postpsychiatry would be a form of cultural studies as it would embrace postdisciplinarity and multidisciplinary scholarship and methodologies.  Rather than drawing exclusively from the medical sciences and neurosciences, postpsychiatry would join with the humanities, the arts, the social sciences, and an array of critical postdisciplinary programs... These postdisciplinary alignments would allow psychiatry to join and form coalitions with the rest of the academy... [Psychiatry] (the quintessential human concern) cut off from the humanities and critical postdisciplinary programs is absurd. (Lewis, 2006, p. 17)
What Lewis is missing from this, at least by explicit mention, is the rich theoretical and methodological resources of rhetoric, a 2,500 year old scholarly tradition that has been called “the oldest human science” (Hernadi, 1987, p. 263).  The production of DSM-5 entails a revision of “both the basic science and the rhetorical frame (or paradigmatic model) of the DSM, while still staying within the same larger scientific episteme” (Lewis, 2006, p. 118). This underscores the importance of putting rhetorical scholarship in conversation with postpsychiatric studies.
	This study shows how rhetorical processes operating within a network of interconnected argumentation systems modulate the development of a scientific-social-institutional cluster.  The work of institutions is the containment of controversies.  If a controversy hits the right seam, it undoes what appears to have been agreement.  As the controversy stabilizes, a new consensus settles.  DSM-5 controversies are characterized by arguments pitting science against prudence, episteme against phronesis.  This conflict was recognized as important by Vico, who argued that “human events are dominated by Chance and Choice, which are extremely subject to change... those whose only concern is abstract truth experience great difficulty in achieving their means, and greater difficulty in attaining their ends” (Vico, 1990, p. 34).  Commenting on the dialectical relationship between science and norms, Habermas argues that to the extent that “politics is scientifically rationalized, and praxis is instructed theoretically by technical recommendation, there is a growth of that residual complex of problems, in the face of which the analysis of the experimental sciences must confess its incompetence” (Habermas, 1973, p. 46).  
	The scientific discourse of psychiatric nosology develops within a polytechtonic rhetorical economy in which the threat of legitimation crisis lingers over changing institutional configurations and professional practices, as epistemic residues accumulate and dissensus grows.  Although DSM will continue to have a history of discourse, this dissertation invites reflection on the politics of the supplement to better understand the history of health as a history of material, social, and linguistic possibilities and as a context over normality.
	Polytechtonic rhetorical products in late modernity are laden with paradox.  The continuous and discontinuous accumulation of epistemic configurations inherited from the past, as new science is grafted onto old residues and into new relationships, has left us with an array of hybrid rhetorical forms.  These hybridities sometimes exist for practical rather than theoretical reasons, generated by the institutional need for compromise.  Inflecting through the extraordinarily complex political-economic environment of late modernity, discordant configurations echo rhetorically through system, institution, and lifeworld.  The tensions entailed in this process bubble up into controversies that threaten to precipitate a legitimation crisis in those institutions incapable of steering themselves around or through these controversies.  This steering task can be difficult because the presence of incompatible field-dependent warrants sustains a constant state of dissensus.  In Hobbes's early modern conception of politics, a quarrel sets off a war of all against all, requiring an external authority to step in.  There is no single external authority in late modern world, and so disciplinary quarrels are resolved when advocates manage to create a consensus in which they invest authority in best practices, imagining validity conditions that will withstand objections from pluralistic audiences.  
	The public controversies surrounding the development of DSM-5, instigated by the Arian crisis of late modernity, unfold through the reflexive discursive dynamics of a quintessentially late modern social institution.  They suggest that we live in a communicative reflexive world, where institutional practitioners are aware that communication itself is self-problematizing.  Late (or high) modernity, as described by Giddens (1990), is characterized by institutional forms that are at the same time radically technical, radically social, and radically personal.  They operate at the macro level around the globe, while also deeply penetrating individuals at the micro level.  An institutional form that exemplifies these elements, DSM functions as a textual constitution of the institutional logic that underwrites standards of practice in psychiatry.  The DSM-5 controversy problematizes and forces us to assemble methods for a polytechtonic field of practice; this study thus provides a model for post-structuralist institutional analysis (Panizza & Miorelli, 2013).
	Modern institutions embody 'rationality structures' developed within culture that opens space for new forms of rationalizing action to be discovered. Rationality, once thought of as a unified process, has become increasingly divided up into different aspects or moments, structured around questions of truth, justice, or taste.  Habermas (1987) suggests that this phenomenon, which he dubs the “signature of modernity,” provokes two important questions that “must be answered: (i) whether a reason that has objectively split up into its moments can still preserve its unity, and (ii) how expert cultures can be mediated with everyday practice” (Habermas, 1987, pp. 398–399).  As I have argued, it is becoming increasingly difficult to answer these questions in the affirmative, and at the same time increasingly important that we find some way to do so.

 

REFERENCES

Ackerknecht, E. H. (1974). The history of the discovery of the vegetative (autonomic) nervous system. Medical History, 18, 1–8.
Adorno, T. W. (1976). On the logic of the social sciences. In G. Adey & D. Frisby (Trans.), The positivist dispute in German sociology (pp. 105–122). London, England: Heinemann.
Adorno, T. W. (1986). What does coming to terms with the past mean? In G. H. Hartman (Ed.), T. Bahti & G. H. Hartman (Trans.), Bitburg in moral and political perspective (pp. 115–129). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Althusser, L. (1994). Ideology and ideological state apparatuses (Notes toward an investigation). In S. Žižek (Ed.), B. Brewster (Trans.), Mapping ideology (pp. 100–140). London, England: Verso.
Alvarez-Jiménez, M., Parker, A. G., Hetrick, S. E., McGorry, P. D., & Gleeson, J. F. (2011). Preventing the second episode: A systematic review and meta-analysis of psychosocial and pharmacological trials in first-episode psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(3), 619–630. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp129
Alvesson, M. (1993). Organizations as rhetoric: Knowledge-intensive firms and the struggle with ambiguity. Journal of Management Studies, 30, 997–1015.
American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-II (Third, revised.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-III-R (Third, revised.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV (Fourth.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (2010a). Board of Trustee Principles. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 23, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/about/Pages/BoardofTrusteePrinciples.aspx
American Psychiatric Association. (2010b). DSM-5: The future of psychiatric diagnosis. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved September 18, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/
American Psychiatric Association. (2010c). Frequently Asked Questions | APA DSM-5. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 7, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/about/pages/faq.aspx
American Psychiatric Association. (2010d). Proposed Revision | Definition of a Mental Disorder. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved December 7, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/proposedrevision/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=465
American Psychiatric Association. (2010e). Proposed Revision | Hypersexual Disorder -- Rationale. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 27, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevisions/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=415#
American Psychiatric Association. (2010f). Proposed Revision | Paraphilic Coercive Disorder. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 27, 2011, from http://www.dsm5.org/proposedrevision/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=416
American Psychiatric Association. (2010g, February 15). Proposed Revision | Psychosis Risk Syndrome. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 1, 2012, from http://web.archive.org/web/20100215023016/http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevisions/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=412
American Psychiatric Association. (2010h, August 3). Proposed Revision | Attenuated Psychotic Symptoms Syndrome. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved October 1, 2012, from http://web.archive.org/web/20101225141040/http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevisions/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=412
American Psychiatric Association. (2011a). About APA. American Psychiatric Association. Retrieved October 20, 2011, from http://www.psych.org/FunctionalMenu/AboutAPA.aspx
American Psychiatric Association. (2011b). Proposed Revision | Functional Neurological Disorder (Conversion Disorder). DSM-5 Development. Retrieved February 12, 2012, from http://www.dsm5.org/proposedrevision/pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=8
American Psychiatric Association. (2012a). Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome (Proposed for Section III of the DSM-5). DSM-5 Development. Retrieved February 2, 2012, from http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevision/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=412
American Psychiatric Association. (2012b). Proposed Revision | Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved September 22, 2012, from http://www.dsm5.org/proposedrevision/Pages/SchizophreniaSpectrumandOtherPsychoticDisorders.aspx
American Psychiatric Association. (2012c, May 16). Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome: Rationale for including Attenuated Psychosis Syndrome (APS) in Section 3 (Appendix) of DSM-5. DSM-5 Development. Retrieved February 2, 2012, from http://www.dsm5.org/ProposedRevision/Pages/proposedrevision.aspx?rid=412
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5 (Fifth.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Amos, A. (2013). An axeman in the cherry orchard: Early intervention rhetoric distorts public policy. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 47(4), 317–320. doi:DOI: 10.1177/0004867412471438
Anthony, W. A. (1993). Recovery from mental illness: The guiding vision of the mental health service system in the 1990s. Psychosocial Rehabilitation Journal, 16(4), 11–23.
Aristotle. (1941a). De anima. In R. McKeon (Ed.), J. A. Smith (Trans.), The basic works of Aristotle (pp. 534–603). New York: Random House.
Aristotle. (1941b). Metaphysics. In R. McKeon (Ed.), W. D. Ross (Trans.), The basic works of Aristotle (pp. 681–926). New York: Random House.
Aristotle. (1941c). Physics. In R. McKeon (Ed.), R. P. Hardie & R. K. Gaye (Trans.), The basic works of Aristotle (pp. 219–397). New York: Random House.
Aristotle. (1984). Rhetoric. In W. R. Roberts (Trans.), The Rhetoric and the Poetics of Aristotle (pp. 1–218). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Aronson, J. (2002). When I use a word... Medicalization. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 324(7342), 904.
Asarnow, R., & Asarnow, J. R. (1981). Attention-information processing dysfunction and vulnerability to schizophrenia: Implications for preventive intervention. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 90–113). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Asokan, T. V. (2009). Towards an ideal paradigm. Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine, 31(2), 58–61. doi:10.4103/0253-7176.63574
Aune, J. A. (2001). Selling the free market:  The rhetoric of economic correctness. New York: Guilford Press.
Aune, J. A. (2003). An historical materialist theory of rhetoric. American Communication Journal, 6(4), 1–20.
Aune, J. A. (2006). The politics of rhetorical studies: A piacular rite. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 92(1), 69–76.
Aune, J. A. (2009). Modernity as a rhetorical problem: Phronesis, forms, and forums in norms of rhetorical culture. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 41, 402–420.
Aviv, R. (2013, January 14). The science of sex abuse. The New Yorker. Retrieved from http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2013/01/14/130114fa_fact_aviv
Baer, E. (1988). Medical semiotics. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Ball, W. W. R. (1888). A short account of the history of mathematics. London, England: Macmillan.
Balzac, H. D. (2010). The girl with the golden eyes. (E. Marriage, Trans.). Retrieved from http://www.gutenberg.org/files/1659/1659-h/1659-h.htm
Barkley, R. A. (2006). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and treatment. New York: Guilford.
Barsky, A. J., & Borus, J. F. (1995). Somatization and medicalization in the era of managed care. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 274(24), 1931–1934.
Barstow, A. L. (1995). Witchcraze: A new history of the European witch hunts - Our legacy of violence against women. San Francisco, CA: HarperCollins.
Baxter, H. (1987). System and life-world in Habermas’s Theory of Communicative Action. Theory and Society, 16(1), 39–86. doi:10.1007/BF00162659
Bayer, R., & Spitzer, R. L. (1985). Neurosis, psychodynamics, and DSM-III. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42(2), 187–196. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1985.01790250081011
Beauchêne, E.-P. C. de. (1783). De l’influence des affections de l’âme dans les maladies nerveuses des femmes. Paris, France: Méquignon l’aîné.
Beck, U. (1992a). From industrial society to the risk society: Questions of survival, social structure and ecological enlightenment. Theory, Culture & Society, 9(1), 97–123.
Beck, U. (1992b). Risk society: Towards a new modernity. (M. Ritter, Trans.). London, England: SAGE Publications.
Beck, U. (1999). World risk society. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
Beck, U. (2000). Risk society revisited: Theory, politics and research programs. In B. Adam, U. Beck, & J. Van Loon (Eds.), The risk society and beyond: Critical issues for social theory (pp. 211–229). London, England: SAGE Publications.
Beck, U., Giddens, A., & Lash, S. (1994). Reflexive modernization: Politics, tradition and aesthetics in the modern social order. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Beer, M. D. (1995). Psychosis: From mental disorder to disease concept. History of Psychiatry, 6, 177–200.
Beer, M. D. (1996). Psychosis: A history of the concept. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 37(4), 273–291.
Begley, S. (1994, February 7). One pill makes you larger, and one pill makes you smaller. Newsweek, 63, 37–40.
Bellak, L. (1955). Toward a unified concept of schizophrenia: An elaboration of the multiple-factor psychosomatic theory of schizophrenia. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 121(1), 60–66.
Bell, R. Q. (1992). Multiple-risk cohorts and segmenting risk as solutions to the problem of false positives in risk for the major psychoses. Psychiatry, 55(4), 370–381.
Berdoe, E. (2006). The origin and growth of the healing art. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing.
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the sociology of knowledge. New York: Doubleday.
Berkenkotter, C. (2011). Is the genre extant? The curious case of psychiatry’s case history. In J. Leach & D. Dysart-Gale (Eds.), Rhetorical questions of health and medicine (pp. 59–76). Plymouth, England: Lexington Books.
Bindé, J. (2000). Towards an ethics of the future. Public Culture, 12, 51–72.
Bird, V., Premkumar, P., Kendall, T., Whittington, C., Mitchell, J., & Kuipers, E. (2010). Early intervention services, cognitive–behavioural therapy and family intervention in early psychosis: systematic review. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 197(5), 350–356. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.109.074526
Black, E. (1992). Rhetorical questions: Studies of public discourse. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Blanchard, R. M. (2009a). Paraphilias vs. paraphilic disorders, pedophilia vs. pedo- and hebephilia, and autogynephilic vs. fetishistic transvestism. Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Sex Therapy and Research (SSTAR), Arlington, VA. Retrieved from http://individual.utoronto.ca/ray_blanchard/index_files/SSTAR.html
Blanchard, R. M. (2009b). Reply to letters regarding pedophilia, hebephilia, and the DSM-V. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38(3), 331–334. doi:10.1007/s10508-008-9427-9
Blashfield, R. K. (1984). The classification of psychopathology. New York: Plenum Press.
Blease, C. (2013). The duty to be Well-informed: The case of depression. Journal of Medical Ethics, Published Online First: April 26, 2013, 1–5. doi:10.1136/medethics-2012-101122
Bleuler, P. E. (1911a). Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias. (J. Zinkin, Trans.). New York: International Universities Press.
Bleuler, P. E. (1911b). Zur theorie das schizophrenen negativismus. Psychiatrisch-Neurologische Wochenschrift, 12(18-21), 171–176; 184–187; 189–191; 195–198.
Bleuler, P. E. (1924). Textbook of psychiatry. (A. A. Brill, Trans.). New York: Macmillan.
Bleuler, P. E. (1987). The prognosis of dementia praecox: The group of schizophrenias. In J. Cutting & M. Shepherd (Eds.), The clinical roots of the schizophrenia concept: Translations of seminal European contributions on schizophrenia (pp. 59–74). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bloch, S., & Reddaway, P. (1985). Psychiatrists and dissenters in the Soviet Union. In E. Stover & E. O. Nightingale (Eds.), The breaking of bodies and minds (pp. 132–163). New York: WH Freeman.
Bogue, R. (2007). Deleuze’s way: Essays in transverse ethics and aesthetics. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Boltanski, L., & Thévenot, L. (2006). On justification: Economies of worth. (C. Porter, Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Boutroux, É. (1897). De l’influence de la philosophie écossaise sur la philosophie française. Transactions de La Société Franco-Écossaise, 16–36.
Boyle, M. (1990). Schizophrenia: A scientific delusion? London: Routledge.
Bradley, C. (1937). The behavior of children receiving Benzedrine. American Journal of Psychiatry, 94, 577–585.
Brask, B. H. (1959). Borderline schizophrenia in children. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 34(3), 265–282. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.1959.tb07579.x
Breidbach, O. (2001). The origin and development of the neurosciences. In P. K. Machamer, R. Grush, & P. McLaughlin (Eds.), Theory and method in the neurosciences (pp. 7–29). Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Bressy, J. (1789). Recherches sur les vapeurs. London, England: Planche.
Breuer, J., & Freud, S. (2000). Studies on hysteria. (J. Strachey, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.
Brockington, I. F., & Meltzer, H. Y. (1983). The nosology of schizoaffective psychosis. Psychiatric Developments, 4, 317–338.
Brock, R. (2002). Sickness in the body politic: Medical imagery in the Greek polis. In V. M. Hope & E. Marshall (Eds.), Death and disease in the ancient city (pp. 24–34). New York: Routledge.
Brody, H. (2008). Hooked: Ethics, the medical profession, and the pharmaceutical industry. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Bronfen, E. (1998). The knotted subject: Hysteria and its discontents. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brooks, G. P. (1976). The faculty psychology of Thomas Reid. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 12, 65–67.
Brown, J. V. (1994). Heroes and non-heroes: Recruiting themes in the historiography of Russian-Soviet psychiatry. In M. S. Micale & R. Porter (Eds.), Discovering the history of psychiatry (pp. 297–307). New York: Oxford University Press.
Brown, P. (1990). The name game: Toward a sociology of diagnosis. The Journal of Mind and Behavior, 11(4), 385–406.
Brown, R. H. (1987). Reason as rhetorical: On relations among epistemology, discourse, and practice. In J. S. Nelson, A. Megill, & D. N. McCloskey (Eds.), The rhetoric of the human sciences: Language and argument in scholarship and public affairs (pp. 184–197). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Brummett, B. (1976). Some implications of “process” or “intersubjectivity”: Postmodern rhetoric. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 9, 21–51.
Brummett, B. (1990). A eulogy for epistemic rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 39, 401–424.
Buchanan, M. (2008). Why markets go bad. New Scientist, 199(2665), 32–35. doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(08)61807-2
Bu?hler, K. (1934). Sprachtheorie: Die darstellungsfunktion der sprache. Stuttgart: Lucius und Lucius.
Burckhardt, J. (1983). The age of Constantine the Great. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Bürgy, M. (2008). The concept of psychosis: Historical and phenomenological aspects. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(6), 1200–1210.
Burke, K. (1963). Definition of man. The Hudson Review, 16(4), 491–514. doi:10.2307/3848123
Burke, K. (1966). Language as symbolic action: Essays on life, literature, and method. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1969a). A grammar of motives. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1969b). A rhetoric of motives. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1974). The philosophy of literary form: Studies in symbolic action. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1984a). Attitudes toward history. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, K. (1984b). Permanence and change: An anatomy of purpose. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burri, R. V., & Dumit, J. (2008). Social studies of scientific imaging and visualization. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies (Third., pp. 297–317). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Caesalpinus, A. (1583). De Plantis Libri XVI. Florence, Italy: Apud Georgium Marescottum.
Callon, M., Lascoumes, P., & Barthe, Y. (2009). Acting in an uncertain world: An essay on technical democracy. (G. Burchell, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Cameron, D. E. (1938). Early schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 95(3), 567–582.
Campbell, K. K. (1972). An exercise in the rhetoric of mythical America. In Critiques of contemporary rhetoric. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Campbell, R. J. (2009). Campbell’s psychiatric dictionary. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Cannon, T. D., Cornblatt, B. A., & McGorry, P. D. (2007). The empirical status of ultra-high risk (prodromal) research paradigm. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 661–664.
Canstatt, K. F. (1841). Handbuch der medicinischen klinik. Stuttgart, Germany: Enke.
Caplan, P. J. (1995). They say you’re crazy: How the world’s most powerful psychiatrists decide who’s normal. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Group.
Carlson, E. A. (2001). The unfit: A history of a bad idea. New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Carroll, J. (2008). The limits of the sublime, the sublime of limits: Hermeneutics as a critique of the postmodern sublime. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 66(2), 171–181.
Cassirer, E. (1944). An essay on man: An introduction to a philosophy of human culture. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cassirer, E. (1957). The philosophy of symbolic forms.  Volume Three: The phenomenology of knowledge. (R. Manheim, Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Castel, R. (1991). From dangerousness to risk. In G. Burchell, C. Gordon, & P. Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality (pp. 281–298). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ceccarelli, L. (2001). Shaping science with rhetoric: The cases of Dobzhansky, Schrödinger, and Wilson. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Cesaratto, T. (2013). Luhmann, all too Luhmann: Nietzsche, Luhmann and the human. In A. L. Cour & A. Philippopoulos-Mihalopoulos (Eds.), Luhmann observed: Radical theoretical encounters (pp. 108–134). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Chandler, D. (2002). Semiotics: The basics. London, England: Routledge.
Charcot, J.-M. (1971). Hysteria, hypnosis and healing: The work of J.-M. Charcot. (A. R. G. Owen, Ed.). New York: Garrett Publications.
Cherwitz, R. A., & Hikins, J. A. (1986). Communication and knowledge: An investigation of rhetorical epistemology. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Chuma, J., & Mahadun, P. (2011). Predicting the development of schizophrenia in high-risk populations: Systematic review of the predictive validity of prodromal criteria. British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 361–366. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.110.086868
Cicero, M. T. (2009). Treatise on Topics. In C. D. Yonge (Trans.), Treatise on rhetorical invention and Treatise on topics (pp. 88–105). New York: Digireads Publishing.
Ciobanu, E. A. (2012). The spectacle of the body in late medieval England. Ia?i, Romania: Editura Lumen.
Clarke, A. E., Shim, J. K., Mamo, L., Fosket, J. R., & Fishman, J. R. (2003). Biomedicalization: Technoscientific transformations of health, illness, and U.S. biomedicine. American Sociological Review, 68(2), 161–194. doi:10.2307/1519765
Clark, M. J. (2004). “Morbid introspection,” unsoundness of mind, and British psychological medicine, c. 1830-c.1900. In W. F. Bynum, R. Porter, & M. Shepherd (Eds.), The anatomy of madness: Essays in the history of psychiatry (Vol. III: The asylum and its psychiatry, pp. 71–101). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Clement of Alexandria. (2012). Miscellanies (Stromata). (A. Roberts & J. Donaldson, Trans.). Memphis, TN: Bottom of the Hill Publishing.
Cloud, D. L. (1994). The materiality of discourse as oxymoron: A challenge to critical rhetoric. Western Journal of Communication (includes Communication Reports), 58(3), 141–163.
Cloud, D. L. (2002). Rhetoric and economics: Or, how rhetoricians can get a little class. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 88(3), 342–358.
Cloud, D. L., Macek, S., & Aune, J. A. (2006). “The limbo of ethical simulacra”: A reply to Ron Greene. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 39(1), 72–84.
Clouston, T. S. (1891). The neuroses of development: The Morrison Lectures for 1890. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21: Food and drugs, Food labeling § 101.93c (2012). Retrieved from http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRsearch.cfm?fr=101.93
Coleman, E. G. (2008). The politics of rationality: Psychiatric Survivors’ challenge to psychiatry. In B. da Costa & K. Philip (Eds.), Tactical biopolitics: Art, activism, and technoscience (pp. 341–364). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Collier, R. (2010). DSM revision surrounded by controversy. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 182(1), 16–17. doi:10.1503/cmaj.109-3108
Collins, P. Y., Patel, V., Joestl, S. S., March, D., Insel, T. R., Daar, A. S., … others. (2011). Grand challenges in global mental health. Nature, 475(7354), 27–30.
Conrad, P. (2005). The shifting engines of medicalization. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 46, 3–14.
Conrad, P. (2007). The medicalization of society: On the transformation of human conditions into treatable disorders. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Conrad, P. (2010). Pills and the pursuit of happiness and normalcy [book review]. Contexts, 9, 78–80.
Conrad, P., & Leiter, V. (2004). Medicalization, markets and consumers. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 45(Suppl.), 158–176.
Conrad, P., Mackie, T., & Mehrotra, A. (2010). Estimating the costs of medicalization. Social Science & Medicine, 70(12), 1943–1947. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.02.019
Conrad, P., & Schneider, J. W. (1992). Deviance and medicalization: From badness to sickness. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Constable, M. (2004). On not leaving law to the lawyers. In A. Sarat (Ed.), Law in the liberal arts (pp. 69–83). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Cooper, R. (2007). Psychiatry and philosophy of science. Montreal, Canada: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Cooper, R. (2011, January 19). Statins: The drug firms’ goldmine. Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/health/healthnews/8267876/Statins-the-drug-firms-goldmine.html
Copernicus, N. (1873). Ad Sanctissium Dominum Paulum III, Pontificem Maximum: Praefatio in libros revolutionum. In G. J. Rhäticus, K. A. Boethke, & E. L. W. M. Curtze (Eds.), De revolutionibus orbium caelestium: Libri VI (pp. 3–8). Thoruni: Sumptibus Societatis Copernicanae.
Corderoy, A. (2012, February 20). About-turn on treatment of the young. The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved from http://www.smh.com.au/national/health/aboutturn-on-treatment-of-the-young-20120219-1th8a.html
Corrigan, P. W., & Penn, D. (1997). Disease and discrimination: Two paradigms that describe severe mental illness. Journal of Mental Health, 6(4), 355–366. doi:10.1080/09638239718680
Cosgrove, L., & Bursztajn, H. J. (2009, January 1). Toward credible conflict of interest policies in clinical psychiatry: Point. Psychiatric Times, 26(1).
Couch, R. (2013, May 5). Psychiatry finally encounters science—and rejects it. Let’s Talk Books And Politics. Retrieved from http://letstalkbooksandpolitics.blogspot.com/2013/05/psychiatry-finally-encounters.html
Coulter, H. L. (1975). Divided legacy: A history of the schism in medical thought (Vols. 1-IV, Vol. Volume I: The patterns emerge: Hippocrates to Paracelsus). Oxford, England: Osprey Publishing.
Cousin, F.-R., Garrabe, J., & Morozov, D. (2008). Anthology of French language psychiatric texts. Le Plessis-Robinson: John Wiley & Sons.
Coveney, C., Williams, S., & Gabe, J. (2011). The sociology of cognitive enhancement: Medicalisation and beyond. Health Sociology Review, 20(4), 372–384.
Cowen, E. L. (1981). Choices and alternatives for primary prevention in mental health. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 178–196). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Cowen, P. J., Harrison, P., & Burns, T. (2012). Shorter Oxford textbook of psychiatry. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Cowley, G. (1994, February 7). The culture of Prozac (cover story). Newsweek, 63, 41–42.
Cowley, G., Springen, K., Leonard, E. A., Robins, K., & Gordon, J. (1990, March 26). The promise of Prozac (cover story). Newsweek, 27, 38–41.
Crane, G. R., & Department of the Classics, Tufts University. (2013). Perseus Digital Library. Perseus Digital Library. Retrieved April 23, 2013, from http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/
Crary, D. (2012, April 29). Debate rages over severity of child-porn sentences. Associated Press. Text.Article. Retrieved March 20, 2014, from http://www.foxnews.com/us/2012/04/29/debate-rages-over-severity-child-porn-sentences/
Crick, N., & Gabriel, J. (2010). The conduit between lifeworld and system: Habermas and the rhetoric of public scientific controversies. RSQ: Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 40(3), 201–223. doi:10.1080/02773941003614464
Crombie, A. C. (1994). Styles of scientific thinking in the European tradition (Vol. II). London, England: Duckworth.
Cromwell, R. L. (1981). Eight decades focus on symptom classification is enough: A discussion. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 114–125). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Crookshank, F. G. (1923). The importance of a theory of signs and a critique of language in the study of medicine. In The meaning of meaning: A study of the influence of language upon thought and of the science of symbolism (pp. 337–355). New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company.
Crossley, N. (2006). Contesting psychiatry: Social movements in mental health. New York: Routledge.
Crowley, S., & Hawhee, D. (2004). Ancient rhetorics for contemporary students. New York: Pearson.
Cunningham, C. O., Kunins, H. V., Roose, R. J., Elam, R. T., & Sohler, N. L. (2007). Barriers to obtaining waivers to prescribe buprenorphine for opioid addiction treatment among HIV physicians. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 22(9), 1325–1329. doi:10.1007/s11606-007-0264-7
Cutter, M. A. G. (2003). Reframing disease contextually. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwar Academic Publishers.
Czubaroff, J. (1997). The public dimension of scientific controversies. Argumentation, 11(1), 51–74.
Danisch, R. (2010). Political rhetoric in a world risk society. Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 40(2), 172–192. doi:10.1080/02773941003614456
Daston, L. (1988). Classical probability in the Enlightenment. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Daston, L. (2000). Biographies of scientific objects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Datta, V. (2013, May 13). Does DSM-5 matter? Yes, but not to psychiatrists. Medicine and society: Notes on the interface of medicine, society, psychiatry, and public health. Retrieved from http://canardtheduck.blogspot.com/2013/05/does-dsm-5-matter-yes-but-not-to.html
Davis, K. L., Stewart, D. G., Friedman, J. I., Buchsbaum, M., Harvey, P. D., Hof, P. R., … Haroutunian, V. (2003). White matter changes in schizophrenia: Evidence for myelin-related dysfunction. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(5), 443.
Debevec, N. (2011, December 4). Politics 2012: Not losin’ my religion. United Press International. Retrieved from http://www.gardenstatejournal.com/content/politics-2012-not-losin-my-religion-1609.html
Decker, H. S. (2010, April 27). A moment of crisis in the history of American psychiatry. h-madness. Retrieved from http://historypsychiatry.wordpress.com/2010/04/27/a-moment-of-crisis-in-the-history-of-american-psychiatry/
Decker, H. S. (2013). The making of DSM-III: A diagnostic manual’s conquest of American psychiatry. New York: Oxford University Press.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia. (B. Massumi, Trans.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
De Moraes Netto, V. (2007). Practice, communication and space: A reflection on the materiality of social structures (Dissertation). University of London, London, England.
Derrida, J. (1974). Of grammatology. (G. C. Spivak, Trans.). Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Descartes, R. (1997). Meditations on first philosophy. (L. J. Lafleur, Trans.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Descartes, R. (1998). Discourse on method. (D. A. Cress, Trans.). Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett Publishing Company.
De Veaumore, M. C. (1785). Mesmer’s aphorisms and instructions. London, England: Glass Warehouse, Coventry-Street.
Dewey, J. (1954). The public and its problems. Chicago: Swallow Press.
Dewhurst, K. (1966). Dr. Thomas Sydenham (1624-1689): His life and original writings. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Diethelm, O. (1971). Medical dissertations of psychiatric interest before 1750. Basel: S. Karger.
DiMaggio, P. J. (1988). Interest and agency in institutional theory. In L. G. Zucker (Ed.), Institutional patterns and organizations: Culture and Environment (pp. 3–21). Cambridge, MA: Ballinger.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 48(2), 147–160.
Donzelot, J. (1979). The policing of families. New York: Pantheon Books.
D’Orazio, D. M., Arkowitz, S., Adams, J., & Maram, W. (2009, January). The California sexually violent predator statute: History, description, & areas for improvement. The California Coalition on Sexual Offending. Retrieved from http://ccoso.org/papers/CCOSO%20SVP%20Paper.pdf
Douglas, M. (1992). Risk and blame: Essays in cultural theory. London, England: Routledge.
Dowbiggin, I. R. (1991). Inheriting madness: Professionalization and psychiatric knowledge in nineteenth-century France. University of California Press.
Dowbiggin, I. R. (2004). Degeneration and heriditarianism in French mental medicine: 1840-90. In W. F. Bynum, R. Porter, & M. Shepherd (Eds.), The anatomy of madness: Essays in the history of psychiatry (pp. 188–232). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Durkheim, É. (1951). Suicide: A study in sociology. (J. A. Spaulding & G. Simpson, Trans.). New York: Free Press.
Durkheim, É. (1982). The rules of sociological method. (W. D. Halls, Trans.). New York: The Free Press.
Durkheim, É. (1997). The division of labor in society. New York: The Free Press.
Durkheim, É. (2001). The elementary forms of religious life. (C. Cosman, Trans.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Edelson, M. (1985). Single case reports as letters to the editor. American Journal of Psychiatry, 142(1), 140.
Ehrman, B. D. (2005). Misquoting Jesus: The story behind who changed the Bible and why. New York: HarperCollins.
Ehrman, B. D. (2014). How Jesus became God: The exaltation of a Jewish preacher from Galilee. New York: HarperCollins.
Eidinow, E. (2007). Oracles, curses, and risk among the ancient Greeks. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Elias, P. (2010, March 23). Crazy controversy. MercatorNet. Retrieved from http://www.mercatornet.com/articles/view/crazy_controversy
Ellenberger, H. F. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: The history and evolution of dynamic psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Empedocles. (2012). Empedocles: Fragments and commentary. (A. Fairbanks, Trans.). Calgary, Canada: Theophania Publishing.
English Language Liturgical Commission. (1997, November 17). The Nicene Creed. Creeds of Christendom. Retrieved April 3, 2014, from http://www.creeds.net/ancient/nicene.htm
Erickson, G. J., & Smith, C. R. (1988). Maximum-entropy and Bayesian methods in science and engineering: Foundations (Vol. 1). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ericson, R. V., & Haggerty, K. D. (1997). Policing the risk society. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Esquirol, J.-É. D. (1838a). Des maladies mentales considérées sous les rapports médical, hygiénique et médico-légal. Paris, France: Ch. Savy (Lyon). Retrieved from http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k765874
Esquirol, J.-É. D. (1838b). Mental maladies: A treatise on insanity. (E. K. Hunt, Trans.). Philadelphia, PA: Lea and Blanchard.
Eusebius. (1999). Life of Constantine. (A. Cameron & S. G. Hall, Trans.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1947). Dimensions of personality. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Fahnestock, J. (2004). Preserving the figure: Consistency in the presentation of scientific arguments. Written Communication, 21(1), 6–31. doi:10.1177/0741088303261034
Falkai, P., Schmitt, A., & Cannon, T. D. (2011). Pathophysiology of schizophrenia. In W. Gaebel (Ed.), Schizophrenia: Current science and clinical practice (pp. 31–65). Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Farber, S. (2012). The spiritual gift of madness: The failure of psychiatry and the rise of the Mad Pride movement. Rochester, Vermont: Inner Traditions.
Farrell, T. B. (1976). Knowledge, consensus, and rhetorical theory. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 62, 1–14.
Farrell, T. B. (1990). From the Parthenon to the Bassinet: Death and rebirth along the epistemic trail. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 76, 78–84.
Farrell, T. B., & Goodnight, G. T. (1981). Accidental rhetoric: The root metaphors of Three Mile Island. Communication Monographs, 48(4), 271–300. doi:10.1080/03637758109376063
Fava, G. A., Grandi, S., Canestrari, R., & Molnar, G. (1990). Prodromal symptoms in primary major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 19(2), 149–152.
Fava, G. A., & Kellner, R. (1991). Prodromal symptoms in affective disorders. Am J Psychiatry, 148(7), 823–830.
Fear, C., Sharp, H., & Healy, D. (1995). Obsessive-compulsive and delusional disorders: Notes on their history, nosology, and interface. Journal of Serotonin Research, 1(suppl. 1), 1–18.
Feuchtersleben, E. von. (1845). Lehrbuch der ärztlichen seelenkunde. Wien, Austria: Gerold.
Feuchtersleben, E. von. (1847). The principles of medical psychology: Being the outlines of a course of lectures. (H. E. Lloyd, Trans., B. G. Babington, Ed.). London, England: Sydenham Society.
Filiano, J. J. (2006). Neurometabolic diseases in the newborn. Clinics in Perinatology, 33(2), 411–479. doi:10.1016/j.clp.2006.03.013
Fink, P. J. (2010). Fink! Still at Large; The DSM-5 promises to change the practice of psychiatry in a big way. Clinical Psychiatry News, 38(3), 6.
Fish, B. (1981). Attempts at intervention with high-risk children, from infancy on. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 226–241). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Fisher, W. R. (1978). Toward a logic of good reasons. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 64, 376–384.
Foucault, M. (1972). The archaeology of knowledge & the discourse on language. (A. M. S. Smith, Trans.). New York: Pantheon Books.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison. (A. Sheridan, Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.
Foucault, M. (1991). Questions of method. In G. Burchell, C. Gordon, & P. Miller (Eds.), The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality (pp. 73–86). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foucault, M. (1994). The order of things: An archaeology of the human sciences. New York: Vintage Books.
Foucault, M. (2001). Madness and civilization: A history of insanity in the age of reason. (R. Howard, Trans.). Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (2006). Psychiatric power: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1973-74. (G. Burchell, Trans., J. Lagrange, Ed.). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Frances, A. J. (2009). A warning sign on the road to DSM-V: Beware of its unintended consequences. Psychiatric Times, 26(8).
Frances, A. J. (2010a). DSM5: Pandora replies to Dr. Frances -- Dr. Frances responds. Psychiatric Times, 24(4). Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/home/content/article/10168/1526647
Frances, A. J. (2010b, March 6). How psychologists can help correct DSM5. DSM-5 in Distress. Retrieved from http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/more-diagnosis/201003/how-psychologists-can-help-correct-dsm5
Frances, A. J. (2010c, March 18). DSM5 “Psychosis Risk Syndrome”--Far too risky. DSM-5 in Distress. Retrieved from http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/dsm5-in-distress/201003/dsm5-psychosis-risk-syndrome-far-too-risky
Frances, A. J. (2010d, March 19). DSM5 and “Psychosis Risk Syndrome:” Not ready for prime time. Psychiatric Times. Retrieved February 15, 2012, from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/dsm-5/content/article/10168/1541615
Frances, A. J. (2011a, March 31). Defending psychiatry from reckless attacks. Couch in Crisis. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/blog/couchincrisis/content/article/10168/1833684
Frances, A. J. (2011b, July 27). DSM-5 will further inflate the ADD bubble: Child work group fails to learn from experience. Couch in Crisis. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/blog/couchincrisis/content/article/10168/1914931
Frances, A. J. (2011c, August 15). Seven questions for Professor Patrick McGorry. Couch in Crisis. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/seven-questions-professor-patrick-mcgorry
Frances, A. J. (2013). Saving normal: An insider’s revolt against out-of-control psychiatric diagnosis, DSM-5, big pharma, and the medicalization of ordinary life. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.
Frances, A. J., & First, M. B. (2011). Paraphilia NOS, nonconsent: Not ready for the courtroom. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 39(4), 555–561.
Franklin, K. (2009, November 9). Paraphilic coercive disorder: Contagious virus? In the news: Forensic psychology, criminology, and psychology law. Retrieved from http://forensicpsychologist.blogspot.com/2009/11/paraphilic-coercive-disorder-contagious.html
Franklin, K. (2011). Letters. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 39(1), 137.
Freberg, L. A. (2006). Discovering biological psychology. Belmont, CA: Cengage Learning.
Freedman, A. M. (1995). The biopsychosocial paradigm and the future of psychiatry. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 36(6), 397–406.
Freud, S. (1893a). Charcot. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 48–55). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1893b). Draft B: The aetiology of the neuroses. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 55–59). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1911). Formulations of the two principles of mental functioning. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 301–306). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1913a). On beginning the treatment. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 363–378). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1913b). Totem and taboo. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 481–513). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1924a). Neurosis and psychosis. In J. Strachey (Ed.), The ego and the id (pp. 147–154). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1924b). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. In P. Gay (Ed.), The Freud reader (pp. 239–293). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S. (1937). Analysis terminable and interminable. International Journal of Psychology and Psycho-Analysis, 18, 373–405.
Freud, S. (1989). Civilization and its discontents. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Freud, S., & Jung, C. G. (1974). The Freud-Jung letters: The correspondence between Sigmund Freud and C.G. Jung. (W. McGuire, Ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Freund, K., Seeley, H. R., Marshall, W. E., & Glinfort, E. K. (1972). Sexual offenders needing special assessment and/or therapy. Canadian Journal of Criminology and Corrections, 14, 3–23.
Friedhoff, A. J. (1981). Can biological risk be measured? Altered? In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 39–51). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Friedland, R., & Alford, R. R. (1991). Bringing society back in: Symbols, practices, and institutional contradictions. In The new institutionalism in organizational analysis (pp. 232–263). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Friston, K. J. (1998). The disconnection hypothesis. Schizophrenia Research, 30(2), 115–125.
Fritch, J., Palczewski, C. H., Farrell, J., & Short, E. (2006). Disingenuous controversy: Responses to Ward Churchill’s 9/11 essay. Argumentation & Advocacy, 42(4), 190–205.
Fuller, A. K., Fuller, A. E., & Blashfield, R. K. (1990). Paraphilic coercive disorder. Journal of Sex Education & Therapy, 16(3), 164–171.
Gafoor, R., Nitsch, D., McCrone, P., Craig, T. K. J., Garety, P. A., Power, P., & McGuire, P. (2010). Effect of early intervention on 5-year outcome in non-affective psychosis. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 196(5), 372–376. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.109.066050
Galen. (2004). Galen’s approach to health and disease: The art of medicine. In P. Elmer & O. P. Grell (Eds.), Health, disease, and society in Europe, 1500-1800: A sourcebook (pp. 1–4). Manchester, England: Manchester University Press.
Galison, P. L. (2000). Image and logic: A material culture of microphysics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gambrill, E. (2012). Propaganda in the helping professions. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Gaonkar, D. P. (1997a). Close readings of the third kind: Reply to my critics. In Rhetorical hermeneutics: Invention and interpretation in the age of science (pp. 330–356). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Gaonkar, D. P. (1997b). The idea of rhetoric in the rhetoric of science. In A. G. Gross & W. M. Keith (Eds.), Rhetorical hermeneutics: Invention and interpretation in the age of science (pp. 25–86). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Gardner, R. A. (2001). Parental alienation syndrome (PAS): Sixteen years later. The American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 45(1), 10–12.
Gaupp, R. (1938). Les tendences du development de la psychiatrie allemande. Annales Medico-Psychologiques, 96, 321–359.
Gaylin, W. (2009). Behavior control: From the brain to the mind. Hastings Center Report, 39(3), 13–16.
Geertz, C. (1964). Ideology as a cultural system. In D. E. Apter (Ed.), Ideology and discontent (pp. 47–76). New York: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of culture. New York: Basic Books.
Geppert, C. M. A. (2006, December 1). Is the DSM the Bible of psychiatry? Psychiatric Times, 23(14). Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/display/article/10168/51591
Gerard, D. L. (1997). Chiarugi and Pinel considered: Soul’s brain/person’s mind. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 33(4), 381–403. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1520-6696(199723)33:4<381::AID-JHBS3>3.0.CO;2-S
Gettier, E. (1963). Is justified true belief knowledge? Analysis, 23(6), 121–123.
Ghaemi, S. N. (2006). Paradigms of psychiatry: Eclecticism and its discontents. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 19(6), 619–624.
Ghigi, R. (Ed.). (2009). The medicalization of ugliness. Salute E Società, 8(2), 67–77.
Giarman, N. J. (1959). Neurohumors in the brain. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine, 32(2), 73–92.
Giddens, A. (1979). Central problems in social theory: Action, structure, and contradiction in social analysis. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. (1990). The consequences of modernity. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1993). New rules of sociological method: A positive critique of interpretive sociologies. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (1999). Risk and responsibility. Modern Law Review, 62(1), 1–10.
Gigerenzer, G., Switjtink, Z., Porter, T., Daston, L., Beatty, J., & Krüger, L. (1989). The empire of chance: How probability changed science and everyday life. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gilman, S. L. (1982). Seeing the insane. New York: University of Nebraska Press.
Glazer, W. (2013). Scientific journalism: The dangers of misinformation. Current Psychiatry, 12(6), 33–35.
Glueck, B. C., Jr. (1955). Final report: Research project for the study and treatment of persons convicted of crimes involving sexual aberrations, June 1952 to June 1955. New York: New York State Department of Mental Hygiene.
Goldacre, B. (2013). Bad Pharma: How drug companies mislead doctors and harm patients. London, England: Faber & Faber.
Goldstein, M. J. (1981). Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980. Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Goodman, L. E. (2003). Islamic humanism. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Goodnight, G. T. (1982). Public, private, and technical spheres of argument: A speculative inquiry into the art of public deliberation. Journal of the American Forensic Association, 18, 214–227.
Goodnight, G. T. (2007). The engagements of communication: Jürgen Habermas on discourse, critical reason, and controversy. In P. Arneson (Ed.), Perspectives on philosophy of communication (pp. 91–110). West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press.
Goodnight, G. T. (2014). From architectonics to polytechtonics: Rhetoric, communication, and information. Poroi, 10(1), 1–21. doi:10.13008/2151-2957.1185
Goodnight, G. T., & Green, S. E. (2010). Rhetoric, risk, and markets: The dot-com bubble. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 96(2), 115–140. doi:10.1080/00335631003796669
Gordon, R. S. (1983). An operational classification of disease prevention. Public Health Reports, 98(2), 107–109.
Gorgias. (1972). Encomium of Helen. In R. K. Sprague & H. Diels (Eds.), G. Kennedy (Trans.), The older Sophists (pp. 50–54). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Gottesman, I. I., & Shields, J. (1982). Schizophrenia: The epigenetic puzzle. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gottfried, R. S. (1983). Black Death: Natural and human disaster in Medieval Europe. New York: The Free Press.
Goux, J.-J. (1990). Symbolic economies: After Marx and Freud. (J. C. Gage, Trans.). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Graff, G., & Birkenstein, C. (2007). “They say/I say”: The moves that matter in persuasive writing. New York: W.W. Norton.
Greenberg, G. (2011, January). Inside the battle to define mental illness. Wired, 19(1).
Greenberg, G. (2013a). The book of woe: The DSM and the unmaking of psychiatry. New York: Blue Rider Press.
Greenberg, G. (2013b, April 23). Does psychiatry need science? The New Yorker Blogs. Retrieved from http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/elements/2013/04/psychiatry-dsm-melancholia-science-controversy.html
Greene, R. W. (1998). Another materialist rhetoric. Critical Studies in Mass Communication, 15(1), 21–40. doi:10.1080/15295039809367031
Greene, R. W. (2004). Rhetoric and capitalism: Rhetorical agency as communicative labor. Philosophy & Rhetoric, 37, 188–206.
Greene, R. W. (2007). Rhetorical capital: Communicative labor, money/speech, and neo-liberal governance. Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies, 4(3), 327–331.
Green, S. E., & Li, Y. (2011). Rhetorical institutionalism: Language, agency, and structure in institutional theory since Alvesson 1993. Journal of Management Studies, 48(7), 1662–1697. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2011.01022.x
Gregory of Nyssa. (1863). Oratio de deitate Filii et Spiritus Sancti. In J.-P. Migne (Ed.), Patrologiae cursus completus (pp. 553–576).
Grimal, P. (1996). The dictionary of classical mythology. New York: Blackwell.
Grob, G. N., & Horwitz, A. V. (2010). Diagnosis, therapy, and evidence: Conundrums in modern American medicine. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Grohol, J. M. (2012, June 11). Surprising? Stimulants help people be more focused. World of Psychology. Retrieved from http://psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2012/06/11/surprising-stimulants-help-people-be-more-focused/
Gronbeck, B. E. (1998). The rhetorics of the past: History, argument, and collective memory. In K. J. Turner (Ed.), Doing rhetorical history: Concepts and cases (pp. 47–60). Tuscaloosa, AL: The University of Alabama Press.
Gronbeck, B. E. (2008). Visual rhetorical studies: Traces through time and space. In L. C. Olson, C. A. Finnegan, & D. S. Hope (Eds.), Visual rhetoric: A reader in communication and American culture (pp. xxi–xxv). Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.
Guillain, G. (1949). Il est injustifié et erroné d’oublier l’oeuvre de J.-M. Charcot sur l’hystérie et les névroses. La Semaine des Hôpitaux de Paris., 25(4), 147–160.
Gurland, B. J., Fleiss, J. L., Sharpe, L., Roberts, P., Cooper, B. M., & Kendell, R. E. (1970). Cross-national study of diagnosis of the mental disorders: Some comparisons of diagnostic criteria from the first investigation. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 11(1), 18–25.
Guthrie, W. K. C. (1969). The sophists. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Gutting, G. (2013, February 6). Depression and the limits of psychiatry. New York Times. Retrieved from http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/06/the-limits-of-psychiatry/
Guze, S. B. (2000). The neo-Kraepelinian revolution. In The Psychopharmacologists: Interviews (Vol. Vol. III, pp. 395–414). New York: Oxford University Press.
Habermas, J. (1973). Theory and practice. (J. Viertel, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1975). Legitimation crisis. (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action: Volume 1: Reason and the rationalization of society. (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1987). The theory of communicative action: Volume 2: Lifeword and system: A critique of functionalist reason. (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Habermas, J. (1988). On the logic of the social sciences. (S. W. Nicholsen & J. A. Stark, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Habermas, J. (1994). The past as future. (M. Pensky, Trans.). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Habermas, J. (1996). Between facts and norms: Contributions to a discourse theory of law and democracy. (W. Rehg, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Habermas, J. (2005). Truth and justification. (B. Fultner, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hacking, I. (1975). The emergence of probability. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hacking, I. (1982). Biopower and the avalanche of printed numbers. Humanities in Society, 5(3-4), 279–295.
Hacking, I. (1990). The taming of chance. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hacking, I. (1998). Rewriting the soul: Multiple personality and the sciences of memory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hacking, I. (1999). The social construction of what? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hacking, I. (2005). The Cartesian vision fulfilled: Analogue bodies and digital minds. Interdisciplinary Science Reviews, 30(2), 153–166. doi:10.1179/030801805X25963
Häfner, H., Maurer, K., Löffler, W., Fätkenheuer, B., an der Heiden, W., Riecher-Rössler, A., … Gattaz, W. F. (1994). The epidemiology of early schizophrenia: Influence of age and gender on onset and early course. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 164(suppl. 23), 29–38.
Hahnemann, S. (1833). The homœopathic medical doctrine: or, “Organon of the healing art.” Dublin, Ireland: W.F. Wakeman.
Hald, A. (2005). A history of probability and statistics and their applications before 1750. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Haller, J. S. (1994). Medical Protestants: The eclectics in American medicine, 1825-1939. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Hall, M. (1843). New memoir on the nervous system. London, England: Hippolyte Bailliere.
Hamilton, E. (1940). Mythology. New York: Penguin Books.
Hanson, R. P. C. (1988). The search for the Christian doctrine of God: The Arian controversy, 318-381 A.D. Edinburgh, Scotland: T. & T. Clark.
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs, and women: The reinvention of nature. New York: Routledge Press.
Harding, R. K. (2002). New Mexico psychologists prescribing law: Bad medicine for patients (Media Advisory No. 02-04). Retrieved from http://www.psych.org/news_stand/psychologistsprescribingADVISORY36.cfm
Harper, D. (2013). Moira. Online etymology dictionary. Retrieved January 17, 2014, from http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?term=Moira
Harpine, W. D. (2004). What Do You Mean, Rhetoric Is Epistemic? Philosophy & Rhetoric, 37(4), 335–352.
Harris, G. (2009, October 21). Drug makers are advocacy group’s biggest donors. New York Times, p. A25.
Hartelius, E. J. (2011). The rhetoric of expertise. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Hauser, M., & Juckel, G. (2012). Psychoeducation in subjects at elevated risk for psychosis: A critical review. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 18(4), 566–569.
Hayek, F. A. (1955). The counter-revolution of science: Studies on the abuse of reason. London: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Healy, D. (1997). The antidepressant era. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Healy, D. (1999). [Review of the books Unauthorized Freud: Doubters confront a legend, by Frederick Crews; Freud 2000, by Anthony Elliott]. British Medical Journal, 318(7188), 949.
Healy, D. (2000a). Antidepressant associated suicidality. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 10(Supplement 3), 260.
Healy, D. (2000b, November 30). Psychopharmacology & the government of the self. Presented at the Look Back. Looking Ahead – Psychiatry in the 21st Century: Mental Illness and Addiction, University of Toronto. Retrieved from http://www.pharmapolitics.com/feb2healy.html
Healy, D. (2004a). Let them eat Prozac: The unhealthy relationship between the pharmaceutical industry and depression. New York: New York University Press.
Healy, D. (2004b). The creation of psychopharmacology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Healy, D. (2008). Mania: A short history of bipolar disorder. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Healy, D. (2011). Science, rhetoric, and the causality of adverse events. International Journal of Risk & Safety in Medicine, 24, 1–14. doi:10.3233/JRS-2011-534
Heather, P. J., & Matthews, J. (1991). The Goths in the fourth century. Liverpool, England: Liverpool University Press.
Heath, I. (2006). Combating disease mongering: Daunting but nonetheless essential. PLoS Med, 3(4), e146. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0030146
Hecker, E. (1871). Die hebephrenie: Ein beitrag zur klinischen psychiatrie. Archiv Für Pathologische Anatomie Und Physiologie Und Für Klinische Medicin, 52, 394–429.
Heckers, S. (2009). Who is at risk for a psychotic disorder? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35(5), 847–850. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp078
Hedgecoe, A. M., & Martin, P. A. (2008). Genomics, STS, and the making of sociotechnical futures. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies (Third., pp. 841–874). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Heidegger, M. (2000). Introduction to metaphysics. (G. Fried & P. R. Polt, Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Heidegger, M. (2008). Being and time. (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.). New York: HarperPerennial/Modern Thought.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 61–135. doi:10.1017 / S0140525X0999152X
Hernadi, P. (1987). Literary interpretation and the rhetoric of the human sciences. In J. S. Nelson, A. Megill, & D. N. McCloskey (Eds.), The rhetoric of the human sciences: Language and argument in scholarship and public affairs. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Herndl, D. P. (1988). The writing cure: Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Anna O., and “hysterical” writing. National Women’s Studies Association Journal, 1(1), 52–74.
Herrick, J. A. (1997). The history and theory of rhetoric: An introduction. Scottsdale, AZ: Gorsuch Scarisbrick.
Hill, F. (1972). Conventional wisdom—traditional form—The president’s message of November 3, 1969. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 58(4), 373–386.
Hippocrates. (1995). The sacred disease. In D. J. Rothman, S. Marcus, & S. A. Kiceluk (Eds.), J. Chadwick & W. N. Mann (Trans.), Medicine and Western civilization (pp. 139–144). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Hoch, P. H. (1950). Contribution to a paper presented by W. Mayer. The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 112, 539–542.
Hoch, P. H., & Polatin, P. (1949). Pseudoneurotic forms of schizophrenia. Psychiatric Quarterly, 23(2), 248–276.
Hogle, L. F. (2008). Emerging medical technologies. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies (Third., pp. 841–874). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Holzman, P. S. (1981). The search for a biological marker for the functional psychoses. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 19–38). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Horkheimer, M., & Adorno, T. W. (2002). Dialectic of enlightenment: Philosophical fragments. (E. Jephcott, Trans., G. S. Noerr, Ed.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Horowitz, A. V. (2002). Creating mental illness. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Horwitz, A. V. (2002). Creating mental illness. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hull, C. L. (1929). Hypnotism in scientific perspective. The Scientific Monthly, 29(2), 154–162.
Hume, D. (1993). An enquiry concerning human understanding. (E. Steinberg, Ed.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Hunt, A., & Wickham, G. (1994). Foucault and law: Towards a sociology of law as governance. Chicago: Pluto Press.
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of European sciences and transcendental phenomenology. (D. Carr, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Hyman, S. E. (2011). Diagnosis of mental disorders in light of modern genetics. In D. A. Regier & W. E. Narrow (Eds.), The conceptual development of DSM-5 (pp. 3–18). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Hyman, S. E. (2013, April 2). Psychiatric drug development: Diagnosing a crisis. Cerebrum (The Dana Foundation). Retrieved from http://www.dana.org/cerebrum/2013/psychiatric_drug_development__diagnosing_a_crisis/
Illich, I. (1976). Medical nemesis: The expropriation of health. New York: Pantheon Books.
Insel, T. R. (2009). Translating scientific opportunity into public health impact: A strategic plan for research on mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66(2), 128–133. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2008.540
Isocrates. (2000). Nicocles. In D. Mirhady & Y. L. Too (Trans.), Isocrates I (pp. 169–181). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Isocrates. (2004a). Archidamus. In T. L. Papillon (Trans.), Isocrates II (pp. 109–133). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Isocrates. (2004b). Panathenaicus. In T. L. Papillon (Trans.), Isocrates II (pp. 23–73). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Jablensky, A. (2010). The diagnostic concept of schizophrenia: Its history, evolution, and future prospects. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience, 12(3), 271.
Jablensky, A. (2011). Diagnosis and revision of the classification systems. In W. Gaebel (Ed.), Schizophrenia: Current science and clinical practice (pp. 1–30). Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Jackson, A., Cavanagh, J., & Scott, J. (2003). A systematic review of manic and depressive prodromes. Journal of Affective Disorders, 74(3), 209–217.
Jafri, M. J., Pearlson, G. D., Stevens, M., & Calhoun, V. D. (2008). A method for functional network connectivity among spatially independent resting-state components in schizophrenia. Neuroimage, 39(4), 1666.
Janet, P. (1920). The major symptoms of hysteria. London, England: Macmillan.
Janet, P. (1930). Autobiography of Pierre Janet. In C. Murchison (Ed.), D. Olson (Trans.), History of psychology in autobiography (pp. 123–133). Worcester, MA: Clark University Press.
Janet, P., & Raymond, F. (1903). Les obsessions et la psychasthénie. Paris: Félix Alcan.
Janke, K., & Klein-Tasman, B. (2012). Executive functions in intellectual disability syndromes. In S. J. Hunter & E. P. Sparrow (Eds.), Executive function and dysfunction: Identification, assessment and treatment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Janssen Pharmaceuticals. (2006). Partial compliance: A hidden danger in schizophrenia (advertisement). Psychiatric News, 41(14). Retrieved from http://www.bonkersinstitute.org/medshow/iceberg.html
Janzarik, W. (2003). Der psychose-begriff und die qualität des psychotischen. Der Nervenarzt, 74, 3–11.
Jaspers, K. (1963). General psychopathology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Jauhar, S. (2014, March 20). The diminishing returns of modern medicine. Well | New York Times. Retrieved from http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/20/the-diminishing-returns-of-modern-medicine/
Jauregui, A. (2014, March 18). Grandmother Erika Perdue gets 14 years for trading massive child porn cache. Huffington Post. Retrieved March 20, 2014, from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/03/18/erika-perdue-child-porn-cache_n_4986524.html?ir=Crime
Johnstone, E. C., Frith, C. D., Crow, T. J., Husband, J., & Kreel, L. (1976). Cerebral ventricular size and cognitive impairment in chronic schizophrenia. The Lancet, 308(7992), 924–926.
Johnstone, T. (1917). Appendix C: Dementia Praecox. In T. Johnstone (Ed.), Lectures on clinical psychiatry (pp. 352–360). New York: William Wood and Company.
Jones, T. (2011, August 18). Professor McGorry defends early intervention. Australian Broadcasting Corporation Transcripts: Lateline. Australia.
Jones, W. P. (1966). The rhetoric of science: A study of scientific ideas and imagery in eighteenth-century English poetry. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Josin, G. M., & Liddle, P. F. (2001). Neural network analysis of the pattern of functional connectivity between cerebral areas in schizophrenia. Biological Cybernetics, 84(2), 117–122.
Jung, C. G. (1960a). On the doctrine of complexes (1934). In R. F. C. Hull (Trans.), Experimental researches (pp. 598–604). London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Jung, C. G. (1960b). The psychogenesis of mental disease. (M. Fordham, S. H. E. Read, & G. Adler, Trans.). London, England: Routledge and K. Paul.
Jung, C. G. (1964). Man and his symbols. New York: Anchor Books.
Kahlbaum, K. L. (1863). Die gruppierung der psychischen krankheiten und die einteilung der seelenstörungen. Danzig, Germany: Kafemann.
Kaldellis, A. (1999). The argument of Psellos’ Chronographia. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
Kane, J., Honigfeld, G., Singer, J., & Meltzer, H. (1988). Clozapine for the treatment-resistant schizophrenic: A double-blind comparison with chlorpromazine. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45(9), 789–796. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1988.01800330013001
Kantrowitz, J. L., Katz, A. L., Paolitto, F., Sashin, J., & Solomon, L. (1987). The role of reality testing in psychoanalysis: Followup of 22 cases. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 35(2), 367–385.
Kaplan, A. (1964). The conduct of inquiry: Methodology for behavioral science. Scranton, PA: Chandler Publishing Company.
Kecmanovi?, D. (2011). Controversies and dilemmas in contemporary psychiatry. New Bruns: Transaction Publishers.
Keith, S. J. (1981). Broadening our concepts of high-risk research. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 305–310). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Keller, M., Neale, M., & Kendler, K. S. (2007). Association of different adverse life events with distinct patterns of depressive symptoms. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164(10), 1521–1529.
Kelman, L. (2004). The premonitory symptoms (prodrome): A tertiary care study of 893 migraineurs. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain, 44(9), 865–872. doi:DOI: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2004.04168.x
Kendall, T. (2011). The rise and fall of the atypical antipsychotics. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 199, 266–268. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.110.083766
Kendell, R. E. (1975). The role of diagnosis in psychiatry. Oxford, England: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
Kendler, K. S. (2005). Toward a philosophical structure for psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(3), 433–440. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.162.3.433
Kendler, K. S., & Gardner, C. O. (2010). Dependent stressful life events and prior depressive episodes in the prediction of major depression: The problem of causal inference in psychiatric epidemiology. Archives of General Psychiatry, 67(11), 1120–1127.
Kendler, K. S., & Halberstadt, L. J. (2013). The road not taken: Life experiences in monozygotic twin pairs discordant for major depression. Molecular Psychiatry, 18(9), 975–984.
Keränen, L. (2008). Bio(in)security: Rhetoric, scientists, and citizens in the age of bioterrorism. In D. Zarefsky & E. Benacka (Eds.), Sizing up rhetoric (pp. 227–249). Long Grove, IL: Waveland.
Keränen, L. (2011). How does a pathogen become a terrorist? The collective transformation of risk into bio(in)security. In J. Leach & D. Dysart-Gale (Eds.), Rhetorical questions of health and medicine (pp. 77–96). Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Kerber, K. L. (2005). Sex and society. New Delhi, India: Global Vision Publishing House.
Kermode, F. (1979). The genesis of secrecy: On the interpretation of narrative. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
King, H. (1993). Once upon a text: Hysteria from Hippocrates. In S. L. Gilman (Ed.), Hysteria beyond Freud (pp. 3–90). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kirk, S. A., & Kutchins, H. (1992). The selling of DSM: The rhetoric of science in psychiatry. New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Kisiel, T. (1997). A hermeneutics of the natural sciences? The debate updated. Man and World, 30(3), 329–341. doi:10.1023/A:1004263719974
Kleinman, A., Eisenberg, L., & Good, B. (1978). Culture, illness, and care: Clinical lessons from anthropologic and cross-cultural research. Annals of Internal Medicine, 88(2), 251–258.
Klein, S. B., & Thorne, B. M. (2006). Biological psychology. New York: Macmillan.
Kline, N. S. (1966). Synopsis of Eugen Bleuler’s Dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias. New York: International Universities Press.
Klosterkötter, J., Ebel, H., Schultze-Lutter, F., & Steinmeyer, E. M. (1996). Diagnostic validity of basic symptoms. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 246(3), 147–154. doi:10.1007/BF02189116
Kluft, R. P. (1993). The treatment of dissociative disorder patients: An overview of discoveries, successes, and failures. Dissociation: Progress in the Dissociative Disorders, 6(2/3), 87–101.
Kluft, R. P. (2014, March 19). A reply to Dr. Noll. Psychiatric Times | History of Psychiatry. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/history-psychiatry/speak-memory/page/0/3
Knight, R. P. (1954). Borderline states. In R. P. Knight (Ed.), Psychoanalytic psychiatry and psychology: Clinical and theoretical papers (Vol. 1, pp. 97–109). New York: International Universities Press.
Knodt, E. (1994). Toward a non-foundationalist epistemology: The Habermas/Luhmann controversy revisited. New German Critique, (61), 77–100. doi:10.2307/488622
Knoff, W. F. (1970). A history of the concept of neurosis, with memoir of William Cullen. American Journal of Psychiatry, 127, 80–84.
Köhler, C., Hall, H., Ögren, S.-O., & Gawell, L. (1985). Specific in vitro and in vivo binding of 3H-raclopride: A potent substituted benzamide drug with high affinity for dopamine D-2 receptors in the brain. Biochemical Pharmacology, 34(13), 2251–2259.
Kondratieva, M. (2007). Understanding mathematics through resolution of paradoxes. Mediterranean Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 6(1), 127–138.
Kosslyn, S. M., & Andersen, R. (1995). General introduction. In S. M. Kosslyn & R. A. Anderson (Eds.), Frontiers in cognitive neuroscience (pp. xv–xxix). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kraemer, H. C., Shrout, P. E., & Rubio-Stipec, M. (2007). Developing the diagnostic and statistical manual V: What will “statistical” mean in DSM-V? Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 42(4), 259–267. doi:10.1007/s00127-007-0163-6
Kraepelin, E. (1896). Psychiatrie: Ein lehrbuch fur studirende und aerzte. (Funfte.). Leipzig: J. A. Barth.
Kraepelin, E. (1907). Clinical psychiatry: For students and physicians. (A. R. Diefendorf, Ed. & Trans.). New York: The Macmillan Company.
Kraepelin, E. (1917). Lectures on clinical psychiatry. (T. Johnstone, Ed.). New York: William Wood and Company.
Kraepelin, E. (1919). Dementia praecox and paraphrenia. (R. M. Barclay, Trans., G. M. Robertson, Ed.). Chicago: Chicago Medical Book Co.
Kraepelin, E. (1974). Comparative psychiatry. In S. R. Hirsch & M. Shepherd (Eds.), H. Marshall (Trans.), Themes and variations in European psychiatry (pp. 7–30). Charlottesville, VA: University Press of Virginia.
Kraepelin, E. (1987). Dementia praecox. In J. Cutting & M. Shepherd (Eds.), The clinical roots of the schizophrenia concept: Translations of seminal European contributions on schizophrenia (pp. 13–25). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kramer, P. (1993). Listening to Prozac: A psychiatrist explores antidepressant drugs and the remaking of the self. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Kräupl-Taylor, F. (1979). The concepts of illness, diseases, and morbus. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kräupl-Taylor, F. (1982). Syndenham’s disease entities. Psychological Medicine, 12, 243–250.
Kretzschmar, C., & Petit, M. (1994). Erwin Stransky et l’ataxie intrapsychique. L’Encéphale, 20(4), 377–383.
Krueger, R. B., & Kaplan, M. S. (2012). Paraphilic diagnoses in DSM-5. Israel Journal of Psychiatry and Related Sciences, 49(4), 248–254.
Krüger, L., Daston, L. J., & Heidelberger, M. (1990). The probabilistic revolution: Ideas in history (Vol. Vol. 1). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kubicki, M., McCarley, R., Westin, C.-F., Park, H.-J., Maier, S., Kikinis, R., … Shenton, M. E. (2007). A review of diffusion tensor imaging studies in schizophrenia. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 41(1), 15–30.
Kuhn, R. (1958). The treatment of depressive states with G 22355 (imipramine hydrochloride). The American Journal of Psychiatry, 115, 459–464.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kupfer, D. J. (2012, June 1). Dr. Kupfer defends DSM-5. Medscape Psychiatry. Retrieved from http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/764735
Kupfer, D. J., First, M. B., & Regier, D. A. (2002). Introduction. In D. J. Kupfer, M. B. First, & D. A. Regier (Eds.), A research agenda for DSM-V (pp. xv–xxiii). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Kutchins, H., & Kirk, S. A. (1997). Making us crazy: DSM: The psychiatric bible and the creation of mental disorders. New York: Free Press.
Lacan, J. (1988). The seminar. Book II. The ego in Freud’s theory and in the technique of psychoanalysis, 1954-1955. (S. Tomaselli, Trans., J.-A. Miller, Ed.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lacasse, J. R., & Leo, J. (2005). Serotonin and depression: A disconnect between the advertisements and the scientific literature. Public Library of Science Medicine, 2(12), 101–106.
Lagrange, J. (2006). Course context. In J. Lagrange (Ed.), Psychiatric power: Lectures at the Collège de France, 1973-74 (pp. 349–367). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Lake, R. A. (1984). Order and disorder in anti-abortion rhetoric: A logological view. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 70(4), 425.
Lake, R. A. (1991). Between myth and history: Enacting time in Native American protest rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 77(2), 123–151.
Lakoff, A. (2000). Adaptive will: The evolution of attention deficit disorder. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 36(2), 149–169.
Lakoff, A. (2005). Pharmaceutical reason: Knowledge and value in global psychiatry. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Lane, C. (2007). Shyness: How normal behavior became a sickness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lane, C. (2009, April 16). Bipolar disorder and its biomythology: An interview with David Healy. Side Effects. Retrieved from http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/side-effects/200904/bipolar-disorder-and-its-biomythology-interview-david-healy
Langfeldt, G. (1939). The schizophreniform states: A katamnestic study based on individual re-examinations, with special reference to diagnostic and prognosis clues, and with a view to presenting a standard material for comparison with the remissions effected by shock treatment. Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard.
Lanham, R. A. (1991). A handlist of rhetorical terms (2nd ed.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Laplace, P. S. (1902). A philosophical essay on probabilities. (F. W. Truscott & F. L. Emory, Trans.). London, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Larson, M. K., Walker, E. F., & Compton, M. T. (2010). Early signs, diagnosis and therapeutics of the prodromal phase of schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics, 10(8), 1347–1359. doi:10.1586/ern.10.93
Laruelle, M., Kegeles, L. S., & Abi-Dargham, A. (2003). Glutamate, dopamine, and schizophrenia. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1003(1), 138–158.
Lash, S. (2000). Risk culture. In B. Adam, U. Beck, & J. Van Loon (Eds.), The risk society and beyond: Critical issues for social theory (pp. 47–62). London, England: SAGE Publications.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to Actor-Network Theory. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Lavater, J. C. (1789). Essays on physiognomy. London, England: W. Tegg.
Lavretsky, H. (1998). The Russian concept of schizophrenia: A review of the literature. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 24(4), 537–557.
Lawson, J. N. (1994). The concept of fate in ancient Mesopotamia of the first millennium: Toward an Understanding of Š?mtu. Wiesbaden, Germany: Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.
LeDoux, J. E. (2003). Synaptic self: How our brains become who we are. New York: Penguin.
Lee, M., Crofts, T., Salter, M., Milivojevic, S., & McGovern, A. (2013). “Let”s get sexting’: Risk, power, sex and criminalisation in the moral domain. International Journal for Crime, Justice, and Social Democracy, 2(1), 35–49.
Leff, M. C. (1978). In search of Ariadne’s thread: A review of the recent literature on rhetorical theory. Central States Speech Journal, 29, 74–91.
Lenzo, K. (1995). Validity and self-reflexivity meet poststructuralism: Scientific ethos and the transgressive self. Educational Researcher, 24(4), 17–24. doi:10.3102/0013189X024004017
Leo, J., & Lacasse, J. (2013, February 5). The SSRIs and ten years of misleading advertising: Who is responsible? Mas in America. Retrieved September 30, 2013, from https://www.madinamerica.com/2013/02/the-ssris-and-ten-years-of-misleading-advertising-whose-responsible/
Leo, R. J., & Regno, P. D. (2000). Atypical antipsychotic use in the treatment of psychosis in primary care. Primary Care Companion to The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 2(6), 194–204.
Levine, S. S., & Zajac, E. J. (2007). The institutional nature of price bubbles. Lee Kong Chian School of Business, Singapore Management University. Retrieved from http://www.usc.edu/schools/business/FBE/seminars/papers/MOR_9-14-07_Levine.pdf
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1963). Structural anthropology. (C. Jacobson & B. G. Schoepf, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.
Lewis, B. (2006). Moving beyond Prozac, DSM, and the new psychiatry. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Leydesdorff, L. (2000). Luhmann, Habermas, and the theory of communication. Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 17(3), 273–288.
Liddell, H. G., & Scott, R. (1940). ??????-?. In A Greek-English Lexicon. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press. Retrieved from http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.04.0057%3Aentry%3Dsu%2Fsthma
Lincoln, C. V., & McGorry, P. (1995). Who cares? Pathways to psychiatric care for young people experiencing a first episode of psychosis. Psychiatric Services (Washington, D.C.), 46(11), 1166–1171.
Linnaeus, C. (1735). Systema Naturae. Stockholm, Sweden: L. Salvii.
Lin, T. (1988). Refining the diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder. Am J Psychiatry, 145, 695–700.
Lippmann, W. (1970). Freud and the layman. In Early writings (pp. 297–301). Liveright, NY: Liveright Publishing Company.
Lombroso, C. (2006). Criminal man. (M. Gibson & N. H. Rafter, Trans.). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Lounsbury, M. (2007). A tale of two cities: Competing logics and practice variation in the professionalizing of mutual funds. Academy of Management Journal, 50(2), 289–307.
Lovejoy, A. O. (1936). The great chain of being. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lucretius. (1994). On the nature of the universe. (R. E. Latham, Trans.). London, England: Penguin Books.
Luhmann, N. (1986). The autopoieisis of social systems. In E. Geyer & J. van Der Zouwen (Eds.), Sociocybernetic paradoxes: Observation, control and evolution of self-steering systems (pp. 172–186). London, England: Sage Publications.
Luhmann, N. (1992). What is communication? Communication Theory, 2(3), 251–259. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2885.1992.tb00042.x
Luhmann, N. (1995). Social systems: Writing science. (J. Bednarz & D. Baecker, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Luhmann, N. (1996). Modern society shocked by its risks. Hong Kong: Social Sciences Research Centre. Retrieved from http://hub.hku.hk/handle/10722/42552
Luhmann, N. (2005). Risk: A sociological theory. (R. Barrett, Trans.). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Lundberg, C. (2012). Lacan in public: Psychoanalysis and the science of rhetoric. Tuscaloosa, AL: University Alabama Press.
Luque, R., Berrios, G. E., & Villagrán, J. M. (2003). Schizophrenia: A conceptual history. International Journal of Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 3(2), 111–140.
Luschnig, C. A. E., & Luschnig, L. J. (1982). Etyma: An introduction to vocabulary-building from Latin & Greek. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Lyotard, J. F. (1991). The inhuman: Reflection on time. (G. Bennington & R. Bowlby, Trans.). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mace, N. C., Koff, S. A., Chelnek, I., & Garfield, S. L. (1949). Diagnostic problems in schizophrenic-like psychosis in children. Journal of Nervous & Mental Disease, 110, 336–346.
Machiavelli, N. (1903). The prince. (L. Ricci, Trans.). London, England: Grant Richards.
MacIntyre, A. C. (2007). After virtue: A study in moral theory (3rd ed.). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
MacLeod, E. L., & Ney, D. M. (2010). Nutritional management of phenylketonuria. Annales Nestlé, 68(2), 58–69. doi:10.1159/000312813
Maehle, A.-H. (1999). Drugs on trial: Experimental pharmacology and therapeutic innovation in the eighteenth century. Amsterdam: Editions Rodopi.
Magnavita, J. J. (1990). Restructuring personality disorders: A short-term dynamic approach. New York: The Guilford Press.
Magner, L. N. (2002). A history of the life sciences. New York: Marcel Dekker.
MAGNETiC. (2007). Magnetic therapy: Inspired by nature, harnessed by science. Magnetic Therapy Products UK. Retrieved April 21, 2014, from http://www.magnetic.uk.com/
Magritte, R. (1929). The treachery of images (This is not a pipe) [La trahision des images (Ceci n’est pas une pipe)]. Retrieved from http://collections.lacma.org/node/239578
Maier, W., Lichtermann, D., Minges, J., Hallmayer, J., Heun, R., Benkert, O., & Levinson, D. F. (1993). Continuity and discontinuity of affective disorders and schizophrenia. Results of a controlled family study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50(11), 871–883.
Maier, W., Lichtermann, D., Minges, J., Heun, R., Hallmayer, J., & Benkert, O. (1992). Schizoaffective disorder and affective disorders with mood-incongruent psychotic features: keep separate or combine? Evidence from a family study. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 149(12), 1666–1673.
Maines, R. P. (2001). The technology of orgasm: “Hysteria,” the vibrator, and women’s sexual satisfaction. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Marková, I. (2005). Insight in psychiatry. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Marx, K. (1904). A contribution to the critique of political economy. (N. I. Stone, Trans.). Chicago: Charles H. Kerr.
Marx, K. (1964). Economic and philosophic manuscripts of 1844. (M. Milligan, Trans.). New York: International Publishers.
Maton, K. (2003). Reflexivity, relationism, & research: Pierre Bourdieu and the epistemic conditions of social scientific knowledge. Space and Culture, 6(1), 52–65. doi:10.1177/1206331202238962
Matthew, M. (2008, November 8). 101 contradictions in the Bible. Think Atheist. Retrieved April 15, 2014, from http://www.thinkatheist.com/notes/101_Contradictions_in_the_Bible
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and cognition: The realization of the living. Hingham, MA: Kluwer.
Maturo, A. (Ed.). (2009). The shifting borders of medicalization: Perspectives and dilemmas of human enhancement. Salute E Società, 8(2), 13–30.
Mauss, M. (2005). The nature of sociology: Two essays. (W. Jeffrey & N. Allen, Trans.). Oxford, England: Berghahn Books.
Maxmen, J. S. (1985). The new psychiatry: How modern psychiatrists think about their patients, theories, diagnoses, drugs, psychotherapies, power, training, families, and private lives. New York: Morrow.
Mayer, W. (1951). Cases of abortive schizophrenia. AMA Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 65(1), 117–119.
McCarthey, L. P. (1991). A psychiatrist using DSM-III: The influence of a charter document in psychiatry. In C. Bazerman & J. G. Paradis (Eds.), Textual dynamics of the professions: Historical and contemporary studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 358–380). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (1994). Knowledge and persuasion in economics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (1997). Big rhetoric, little rhetoric: Gaonkar on the rhetoric of science. In A. G. Gross & W. M. Keith (Eds.), Rhetorical hermeneutics: Invention and interpretation in the age of science (pp. 101–112). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (1998). The rhetoric of economics (Rhetoric of the human sciences). Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (2002). The secret sins of economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McCloskey, D. N. (2010). Bourgeois dignity: Why economics can’t explain the modern world. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McCormick, J. (1996). Health scares are bad for your health. In D. W. Warburton & N. Sherwood (Eds.), Pleasure and the quality of life (pp. 189–199). New York: Wiley.
McFarlane, W. R., Lynch, S., & Melton, R. (2012). Family psychoeducation in clinical high risk and first-episode psychosis. Adolescent Psychiatry, 2(2), 182–194. doi:10.2174/2210676611202020182
McGee, M. C. (1980). The “ideograph:” A link between rhetoric and ideology. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 66, 1–16.
McGorry, P. D. (1991). Paradigm failure in functional psychosis: Review and implications. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 25(1), 43–55.
McGorry, P. D. (1992). The concept of recovery and secondary prevention in psychotic disorders. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 26(1), 3–17.
McGorry, P. D. (1993). Early psychosis prevention and intervention centre. Australasian Psychiatry: Bulletin of Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists, 1(1), 32–34. doi:10.3109/10398569309081303
McGorry, P. D. (1994). The influence of illness duration on syndrome clarity and stability in functional psychosis: Does the diagnosis emerge and stabilise with time? The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 28(4), 607–619.
McGorry, P. D. (1995). A treatment-relevant classification of psychotic disorders. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 29(4), 555–558. doi:10.3109/00048679509064966
McGorry, P. D. (2011, October 5). The real questions in mental health reform. Psychiatric Times, 28(10).
McGorry, P. D., Killackey, E. J., & Yung, A. R. (2008). Early intervention in psychosis: Concepts, evidence and future directions. World Psychiatry, 7(3), 148–156.
McGorry, P. D., Nelson, B., Amminger, G. P., Bechdolf, A., Francey, S. M., Berger, G., … Yung, A. R. (2009). Intervention in individuals at ultra-high risk for psychosis: A review and future directions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70(9), 1206–1213. doi:10.4088/JCP.08r04472
McGorry, P. D., Nordentoft, M., & Simonsen, E. (2005). Introduction to “Early psychosis: A bridge to the future.” British Journal of Psychiatry, 187(Suppl. 48), s1–s3.
McHugh, P. R., & Slavney, P. R. (1983). The perspective of psychiatry. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
McKeon, R. (1975). Arts of invention and arts of memory: Creation and criticism. Critical Inquiry, 1(4), 723–739. doi:10.2307/1342845
McKeon, R. (1981). Philosophy as an agent of civilization. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 41(4), 419–436. doi:10.2307/2107249
McKeon, R. (1987). The uses of rhetoric in a technological age: Architectonic productive arts. In M. Backman (Ed.), Rhetoric: Essays in invention and discovery (pp. 1–24). Woodbridge, CT: Ox Bow Press.
McKerrow, R. E. (1977). Rhetorical validity: An analysis of three perspectives on the justification of rhetorical argument. Journal of the American Forensic Association, 13, 133–141.
McNeil Laboratories. (1968). How can you help him if he refuses medication? Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 19(5). Retrieved from http://www.bonkersinstitute.org/medshow/9recalcitrant.html
McNeil Laboratories. (1974). Cooperation often begins with Haldol. Archives of General Psychiatry, 31(5), 732–733.
Mead, G. H. (1967). Mind, self, and society: From the standpoint of a social behaviorist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mednick, S. A. (1960). The early and advanced schizophrenic. In S. A. Mednick & J. W. Higgens (Eds.), Current research in schizophrenia (pp. 67–95). Ann Arbor, MI: Edwards.
Metzl, J. M. (2009). The protest psychosis: How schizophrenia became a black disease. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Meynert, T. (1890). Psychiatry: A clinical treatise on diseases of the fore-brain based upon a study of its structure, functions, and nutrition. Vienna, Germany: G.P. Putnam’s Sons.
Micale, M. S. (1993). On the “disappearance” of hysteria: A study in the clinical deconstruction of a diagnosis. Isis, 84(3), 496–526.
Michals, K., & Matalon, R. (1985). Phenylalanine metabolites, attention span and hyperactivity. The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 42(2), 361–365.
Michels, R., & Marzuk, P. M. (1993). Progress in psychiatry. The New England Journal of Medicine, 329, 552–560.
Miller, C. R. (1992). Kairos in the rhetoric of science. In S. P. Witte, N. Nakadate, & R. D. Cherry (Eds.), A rhetoric of doing: Essays on written discourse in honor of James L. Kinneavy (pp. 310–327). Carbondale, IL: Board of Trustees, Southern Illinois University.
Miller, P., & Rose, N. S. (1990). Governing economic life. Economy and Society, 19(1), 1–31. doi:10.1080/03085149000000001
Millon, T. (2004). Masters of the mind: Exploring the story of mental illness from ancient times to the new millennium. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Millon, T., Millon, C. M., Meagher, S., Grossman, S., & Ramnath, R. (2012). Personality disorders in modern life. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Millon, T., & Simonsen, E. (2010). A précis of psychopathological history. In T. Millon, R. F. Krueger, & E. Simonsen (Eds.), Contemporary directions in psychopatholgy: Scientific foundations of the DSM-V and ICD-11. New York: The Guilford Press.
Moghaddam, B., & Javitt, D. (2011). From revolution to evolution: The glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia and its implication for treatment. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37(1), 4–15.
Moran, M. (2008, August 15). Senator wants APA records of drug-industry interactions. Psychiatric News, 43(16), 1–6.
Morel, B. A. (1852). Études cliniques: Traité théorique et pratique des maladies mentales considérées dans leur nature, leur traitement, et dans leur rapport avec la médecine légale des aliénés. Metz, France: Grimblot.
Morel, B. A. (1860). Traité des maladies mentales. Paris, France: Victor Masson.
Morgagni, G. B. (1903). Founders of modern medicine: Giovanni Battista Morgagni. (1682-1771). Medical Library and Historical Journal, 1(4), 270–277.
Morgan, T. (1725). Philosophical principles of medicine, in three parts. London, England: Printed for J. Osborn and T. Longman in Paternoster-Row.
Morris, J. N. (1978). The uses of epidemiology (3rd ed.). Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Morrison, L. J. (2005). Talking back to psychiatry: The Psychiatric Consumer/Survivor/Ex-Patient movement. New York: Routledge.
Morris, R. (1985). Time’s arrows: Scientific attitudes toward time. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Moskowitz, A., & Heim, G. (2011). Eugen Bleuler’s dementia praecox or the group of schizophrenias (1911): A centenary appreciation and reconsideration. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(3), 471–479.
Moyer, C. S. (2010, June 21). DSM-5 revised in response to comments; clinicians prepare to field-test. American Medical News, p. 1.
Moynihan, R. (2010). Who benefits from treating prehypertension? British Medical Journal, 341, 484–485. doi:10.1136/bmj.c4442
Moynihan, R. (2011). A new deal on disease definition. British Medical Journal, 342, 1054–4056. doi:10.1136/bmj.d2548
Mrazek, P. J., & Haggerty, R. J. (Eds.). (1994). Reducing risks for mental disorders: Frontiers for preventive intervention research. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Murphy, G. (1956). Historical introduction to modern psychology. London, England: Routledge.
Murphy, T. D. (1981). Medical knowledge and statistical methods in early nineteenth-century France. Medical History, 25, 301–319.
Myerson, A. (1936). Neuroses and neuropsychoses. American Journal of Psychiatry, 93(2), 263–301.
Nabokov, V. (1973). Strong opinions. New York: Vintage Books.
Nahin, R. L., Barnes, P. M., Stussman, B. J., & Bloom, B. (2009). Costs of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) and frequency of visits to CAM practitioners: United States, 2007 (No. 18). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved from http://nccam.nih.gov/news/camstats/costs/costdatafs.htm
National Institute of Mental Health. (2014). What is borderline personality disorder? NIMH: Transforming the Understanding and Treatment of Mental Illnesses. Retrieved March 15, 2014, from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/borderline-personality-disorder/index.shtml
National Research Council. (2006). A strategy for assessing science: Behavioral and social research on aging. (I. Feller & P. C. Stern, Eds.). Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK26378/
Nicholson, T. R. J., & Kanaan, R. A. A. (2009). Conversion disorder. Psychiatry, 8(5), 164–169. doi:10.1016/j.mppsy.2009.03.001
Nietzsche, F. W. (1874). On the uses and disadvantages of history for life. In D. Breazeale (Ed.), R. J. Hollingdale (Trans.), Untimely meditations (pp. 57–123). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Nietzsche, F. W. (1986). Human, all too human: A book for free spirits. (R. J. Hollingdale, Trans.). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Noll, R. (2007). The encyclopedia of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders (Third.). New York: Facts on File, Inc.
Noll, R. (2011). American madness: The rise and fall of dementia praecox. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Noll, R. (2014, March 19). Speak, Memory. Psychiatric Times | History of Psychiatry. Retrieved from http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/history-psychiatry/speak-memory/
Norrie, P. A. (2003). The history of wine as medicine. In M. Sandler & R. Pinder (Eds.), Wine: A scientific exploration (pp. 21–55). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Nowotny, H. (1992). Time and social theory: Towards a social theory of time. Time & Society, 1(3), 421–454. doi:10.1177/0961463X92001003006
Noyes, J. K. (2004). Nomadism, nomadology, postcolonialism: By way of introduction. Interventions, 6(2), 159–168. doi:10.1080/1369801042000238300
Olson, K. M., & Goodnight, G. T. (1994). Entanglements of consumption, cruelty, privacy, and fashion: The social controversy over fur. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 80(3), 249–276.
Oppenheimer, J. R. (2006). An atomic scientist’s credo. In J. Robert Oppenheimer: A life (pp. 49–58). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Ougrin, D., Gluzman, S., & Dratcu, L. (2006). Psychiatry in post-communist Ukraine: Dismantling the past, paving the way for the future. Psychiatric Bulletin, 30(12), 456–459. doi:10.1192/pb.30.12.456
Pagel, W. (1982). Paracelsus: An introduction to philosophical medicine in the era of the renaissance. New York: Karger Publishers.
Palczewski, C. H. (1994). The feminist anti-pornography movement and the rhetorical construction of social knowledge: A study of the MacKinnon/Dworkin Civil Rights Ordinance (Dissertation). Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
Panizza, F., & Miorelli, R. (2013). Taking discourse seriously: Discursive institutionalism and post-structuralist discourse theory. Political Studies, 61(2), 301–318. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9248.2012.00967.x
Paracelsus. (1657). The chemical transmutation, genealogy and generation of metals & minerals. (R. Turner, Trans.). London, England: Rich. Moon at the Seven Stars, and Hen. Fletcher at the Three Gilt Cups in Paul’s Church-yard.
Pardes, H. (1981). Foreword. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. iii–iv). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Pareto, V. (1935). The mind and society [Trattato di sociologia generale]. (A. Bongiorno & A. Livingston, Trans.) (Vol. 3: Theory of derivations). London, England: Jonathan Cape  Limited. Retrieved from http://archive.org/details/mindandsocietyvo029378mbp
Paris, J. (2008). Prescriptions for the mind: A critical view of contemporary psychiatry. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Paris, J. (2013a). The ideology behind DSM-5. In J. Paris & J. Phillips (Eds.), Making the DSM-5: Concepts and controversies (pp. 39–44). New York: Springer.
Paris, J. (2013b). The intelligent clinician’s guide to the DSM-5. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Parker, G., Fink, M., Shorter, E., Taylor, M. A., Akiskal, H., Berrios, G. E., … Swartz, C. (2010). Issues for DSM-5: Whither melancholia? The case for its classification as a distinct mood disorder. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(7), 745–747. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09101525
Parnas, J. (2005). Clinical detection of schizophrenia-prone individuals. British Journal of Psychiatry, 187(suppl. 48), s111–s112.
Parsons, T. (1951). The social system. New York: Free Press.
Paul VI. (1963, December 4). Sacrosanctum concilium: Constitution on the sacred liturgy. Vatican II. Retrieved from http://www.vatican.va/archive/hist_councils/ii_vatican_council/documents/vat-ii_const_19631204_sacrosanctum-concilium_en.html
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reflexes: An investigation of the cerebral cortex. (G. V. Anrep, Trans.). London, England: Oxford University Press.
Payer, L. (1992). Disease mongers: How doctors, drug companies, and insurers are making you feel sick. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Pêcheux, M. (2012). The mechanism of ideological (mis)recognition. In S. Žižek (Ed.), N. Nagpal (Trans.), Mapping ideology (pp. 141–151). London, England: Verso.
Peirce, C. S. (1868). On a new list of categories. Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 7, 287–298.
Perry, C., & Laurence, J.-R. (1984). Mental processing outside of awareness: The contributions of Freud and Janet. In K. S. Bowers & D. Meichenbaum (Eds.), The unconscious reconsidered (pp. 9–48). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Philo. (1993). De Iosepho. In C. D. Yonge (Trans.), The works of Philo: Complete and unabridged. Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Publishers.
Philostratus, F. (1809). The life of Apollonius of Tyana: Translated from the Greek of Philostratus. (E. Berwick, Trans.). London, England: T. Payne, Pall Mall.
Pierre, J. M. (2013). Overdiagnosis, underdiagnosis, synthesis: A dialectic for psychiatry and the DSM. In J. Paris & J. Phillips (Eds.), Making the DSM-5: Concepts and controversies (pp. 105–124). New York: Springer.
Pies, R. (2013, May 31). How the DSM-5 got grief, bereavement right. World of Psychology. Retrieved from http://psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2013/05/31/how-the-dsm-5-got-grief-bereavement-right/
Pietz, J., Kreis, R., Rupp, A., Mayatepek, E., Rating, D., Boesch, C., & Bremer, H. J. (1999). Large neutral amino acids block phenylalanine transport into brain tissue in patients with phenylketonuria. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 103(8), 1169–1178. doi:10.1172/JCI5017
Pinel, P. (1807). Résultats d’observations et construction de tables pour servir à déterminer le degré de probabilité de la guérison des aliénés. In Mémoires de la classe des sciences mathématiques et physiques de l’Institut National de France (pp. 169–205). Paris, France: Baudouin, Imprimeur de L’Institut national.
Pinel, P. (2008). Medico-philosophical treatise on mental alienation: Second edition, entirely reworked and extensively expanded (1809). (G. Hickish, D. Healy, & L. C. Charland, Trans.). Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell.
Plato. (1903). Phaedrus. In Platonis Opera (Annenberg CPB/Project.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Plato. (1977). Phaedo. (G. M. A. Grube, Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Plato. (1997a). Charmides. In J. M. Cooper & D. S. Hutchinson (Eds.), R. K. Sprague (Trans.), Plato: Complete works (pp. 639–663). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Plato. (1997b). Gorgias. In J. M. Cooper & D. S. Hutchinson (Eds.), D. J. Zeyl (Trans.), Complete works (pp. 791–869). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Plato. (1997c). Phaedrus. In J. M. Cooper (Ed.), A. Nehamas & P. Woodruff (Trans.), Plato: Complete works (pp. 506–556). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Plato. (1997d). Republic. In J. M. Cooper & D. S. Hutchinson (Eds.), G. M. A. Grube (Trans.), Complete works (pp. 971–1223). Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing Company.
Poli, R. (2010). The complexity of self-reference: A critical evaluation of Luhmann’s theory of social systems. Journal of Sociocybernetics, 8(1/2), 1–23.
Popov, Y. V., & Lichko, A. E. (1991). A somber page in the history of the All-Union Psychiatric Association. Bekhterev Review of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology, 3, 116–120.
Popper, K. R. (1935). The logic of scientific discovery. New York: Routledge.
Porter, D. (1998). Health, civilization and the state: A history of public health from ancient to modern times. London, England: Routledge.
Porter, R. (1985). “Under the influence”: Mesmerism in England. History Today, 35(9), 22–29.
Porter, R. (1991). Psychiatry pre-1800. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 4(5), 738–742.
Posselt, G. (2005). The tropological economy of catachresis. Critical Studies, 25(1), 81–94.
Poulantzas, N. (1973). Political power and social classes. London, England: Verso.
Poulton, R., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., Cannon, M., Murray, R., & Harrington, H. (2000). Children’s self-reported psychotic symptoms and adult schizophreniform disorder: A 15-year longitudinal study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(11), 1053–1058. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.57.11.1053
Power, P., Iacoponi, E., Reynolds, N., Fisher, H., Russell, M., Garety, P., … Craig, T. (2007). The Lambeth Early Onset Crisis Assessment Team Study: General practitioner education and access to an early detection team in first-episode psychosis. The British Journal of Psychiatry. Supplement, 51, s133–139. doi:10.1192/bjp.191.51.s133
Prelli, L. J. (1989). A rhetoric of science: Inventing scientific discourse. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Preul, M. C. (1997). A history of neuroscience from Galen to Gall. In S. H. Greenblatt, T. F. Dagi, & M. H. Epsteine (Eds.), A history of neurosurgery in its scientific and professional contexts (pp. 99–130). Park Ridge, IL: The American Association of Neurological Surgeons.
Prior, L., Glasner, P., & McNally, R. (2000). Genotechnology: Three challenges to risk legitimation. In B. Adam, U. Beck, & J. van Loon (Eds.), The risk society and beyond: Critical issues for social theory. London, England: SAGE Publications.
Pryor, R. (1981). On the method of critical inquiry and its implications for a critical theory of communication (pp. 25–36). Washington, DC: University Press of Virginia.
Quintilian. (1998). The Institutio oratoria of Quintilian. (H. E. Butler, Trans.). Harvard University Press.
Rabinow, P. (1996). Artificiality and Enlightenment: From sociobiology to biosociality. In Essays on the anthropology of reason (pp. 91–111). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rado, S. (1953). Dynamics and classification of disordered behavior. American Journal of Psychiatry, 110(6), 406–416.
Railsback, C. C. (1983). Beyond rhetorical relativism: A structural-material model of truth and objective reality. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 69, 351–363.
Rastogi, S. (2012). Evidence-based practice in complementary and alternative medicine: Perspectives, protocols, problems and potential in Ayurveda. Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.
Raulin, M. J. (1758). Traité des affections vaporeuses du sexe: Avec l’exposition de leurs symptômes, de leurs différentes causes, & la méthode de les guérir. Paris, France: Chez Jean-Thomas Herissant.
Regnault, F. (2012). The thought of the Prince. In P. Hallward & K. Peden (Eds.), Concept and form, Volume 1: Selections from the Cahiers Pour L’Analyse (pp. 229–258). London, England: Verso Books.
Reid, T. (1785). The works of Thomas Reid. (W. Hamilton, Ed.). Bristol, England: Thoemmes Press.
Reith, G. (1999). The age of chance: Gambling in Western culture. New York: Routledge.
Reynolds, E. S. (1894). Diseases of the nervous system, including insanity. In Year book of treatment for 1894: A critical review for practitioners of medicine and surgery (pp. 73–111). Philadelphia, PA: Lea Brothers.
Rheinberger, H.-J. (1997). Towards a history of epistemic things: Synthesizing proteins in a test tube. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ricoeur, P. (1976). Interpretation theory: Discourse and the surplus of meaning. Fort Worth, TX: Texas Christian University Press.
Rimer, S. (1993, December 13). With millions taking Prozac, a legal drug culture arises. The New York Times, p. A1.
Ringer, S., & Sainsbury, H. (1892). Sedatives. In D. H. Tuke (Ed.),  (Vol. 2, pp. 1128–1147). Philadelphia, PA: P. Blakiston.
Risk. (2012). Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved from http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/166306
Riskin, J. (2002). Science in the age of sensibility: The sentimental empiricists of the French Enlightenment. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Rocco, F. (2004). Quinine: Malaria and the quest for a cure that changed the world. New York: HarperCollins.
Roche. (1981). One of nature’s most specific designs... Librium: One of man’s. American Journal of Psychiatry, 138(11), A36–A37.
Rosenbaum, M. (1980). The role of the term schizophrenia in the decline of diagnoses of multiple personality. Archives of General Psychiatry, 37(12), 1383–1385. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1980.01780250069008
Rosenberg, C. E. (2006). Contested boundaries: Psychiatry, disease, and diagnosis. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 49(3), 407–424.
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane places. Science, 179(4070), 250–258.
Rosenman, Stephen. (2008). Metaphor, meaning and psychiatry. Australasian Psychiatry, 16(6), 391–396.
Rose, N. S. (1989). Governing the soul: The shaping of the private self. London, England: Free Association Books.
Rose, N. S. (1999). Powers of freedom: Reframing political thought. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Rose, N. S. (2007). The politics of life itself: Biomedicine, power, and subjectivity in the twenty-first century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, N. S., & Abi-Rached, J. M. (2013). Neuro: The new brain sciences and the management of the mind. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rose, S. P. R. (2005). The 21st century brain: Explaining, mending and manipulating the mind. London, England: Jonathan Cape.
Rossi, A. M. (1962). Some pre-World War II antecedents of community mental health theory and practice. Mental Hygiene, 46, 78–94.
Rounsaville, B. J., Alarcón, R. D., Andrews, G., Jackson, J. S., Kendell, R. E., & Kendler, K. (2002). Basic nomenclature issues for DSM-V. In D. J. Kupfer, M. B. First, & D. A. Regier (Eds.), A research agenda for DSM-V (pp. 1–30). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Rousseau, G. S. (1993). “A strange pathology”: Hysteria in the early modern world. In S. L. Gilman (Ed.), Hysteria beyond Freud (pp. 91–224). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Rubenstein, R. E. (1999). When Jesus became God: The struggle to define Christianity during the last days of Rome. Orlando, FL: Harcourt.
Sadler, J. Z. (2013). Considering the economy of DSM alternatives. In J. Paris & J. Phillips (Eds.), Making the DSM-5: Concepts and controversies. New York: Springer.
Saedi, G. A. (2012, February 13). The Inclusion of PMDD in DSM-5. Millennial Media | Psychology Today. Retrieved from http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/millennial-media/201202/the-inclusion-pmdd-in-dsm-5
Sághy, M. (1999). The adventus of Constantius II to Rome 357 A.D. In B. Nagy & M. Sebok (Eds.), The man of many devices, who wandered full many ways: Festschrift in honour of János M. Bak (pp. 148–159). Budapest, Hungary: Central European University Press.
Sahlins, M. (1972). Stone age economics. Chicago: Aldine-Atherton.
Salazar, P.-J. (2011). Four easy pieces and a coda: Rhetoremes of justice. African Yearbook of Rhetoric, 2(1), 103–108.
Sartorius, N. (2011). Meta effects of classifying mental disorders. In D. A. Regier, W. E. Narrow, E. A. Kuhl, & D. J. Kupfer (Eds.), The conceptual development of DSM-5 (pp. 59–80). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Saussure, F. de. (1959). Course in general linguistics. (W. Baskin, Trans., C. Bally & A. Sechehaye, Eds.). Philosophical Library. Retrieved from http://archive.org/details/courseingenerall00saus
Scharfetter, C. (1987). Psychische Vulnerabilität – Canstatt 1841. Zur Geschichte des Verständnisses von Vulnerabilität, Prädisposition und Psychose in der 1. Hälfte des 19. Jahrhunderts. Der Nervenarzt, 58, 527.
Schatzberg, A. F., Scully, Jr., J. H., Kupfer, D. J., & Regier, D. A. (2009, July 1). Setting the record straight: A response to Frances commentary on DSM-V. Psychiatric Times, 26(8).
Scheff, T. J. (1966). Being mentally ill: A sociological theory. Chicago: Aldine.
Schiappa, E. (1993). Arguing about definitions. Argumentation, 7(4), 403–417. doi:10.1007/BF00711058
Schiappa, E. (2003). Defining reality: Definitions and the politics of meaning. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Schildkraut, J. J. (1967). The catecholamine hypothesis of affective disorders: A review of supporting evidence. International Journal of Psychiatry, 4(3), 203–217.
Schmidt-Degenhard, M. (1988). Disposition-Vulnerabilität-Verletzlichkeit. Der Nervenarzt, 59, 573–585.
Schmitt, B. D. (1975). The minimal brain dysfunction myth. American Journal of Diseases of Children, 129(11), 1313–1318. doi:10.1001/archpedi.1975.02120480037009
Schneck, J. M. (1957). Historical notes: Thomas Sydenham and psychological medicine. American Journal of Psychiatry, 113(11), 1034–1036.
Scott, A. (2000). Risk society or angst society? Two views of risk, consciousness, and community. In B. Adam, U. Beck, & J. Van Loon (Eds.), The risk society and beyond: Critical issues for social theory (pp. 33–46). London, England: SAGE Publications.
Scott, R. L. (1967). On viewing rhetoric as epistemic. Central States Speech Journal, 18(1), 9–17. doi:10.1080/10510976709362856
Scott, R. L. (1976). On viewing rhetoric as epistemic: Ten years later. Central States Speech Journal, 27, 258–266.
Scott, W. R. (2014). Institutions and organizations: ideas, interests and identities (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Sechenov, I. M. (1863). Reflexes of the brain. In M. N. Shaternikov (Ed.), A. A. Subkov (Trans.), Sechenov’s selected works. Moscow-Leningrad: State Publishing House for Biological and Medical Literature.
Sedler, M. J. (1994). Foundations of the new nosology. The Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 19, 219–238.
Shakespeare, W. (1904). Hamlet. London, England: William Heinemann.
Shea, E. P. (2008). How the gene got its groove: Figurative language, science, and the rhetoric of the real. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Shedler, J., & Westen, D. (2004). Refining personality disorder diagnosis: Integrating science and practice. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161(8), 1350–1365.
Sheldon, H. C. (1895). The early church. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell & Co.
Shorter, E. (2007). The doctrine of the two depressions in historical perspective. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. Supplementum, (433), 5–13. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.2007.00957.x
Showalter, E. (1998). Hystories: Hysterical epidemics and modern media. New York: Columbia University Press.
Siegler, M., & Osmond, H. (1974). Models of madness, models of medicine. New York: Macmillan.
Simon, H. A. (1978). Rationality as process and as product of thought. The American Economic Review, 1–16.
Simon, H. A. (1991). Bounded rationality and organizational learning. Organization Science, 2(1), 125–134.
Singer, M. (1981). Comments. In M. J. Goldstein (Ed.), Preventive intervention in schizophrenia: Are we ready? Proceedings of a conference held at the University of California, Los Angeles, May 15-16, 1980 (pp. 173–175). Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Singh, F., DeJoseph, M., & Cadenhead, K. S. (2014). Therapeutic considerations in individuals at clinical risk for developing psychosis. Current Treatment Options in Psychiatry, 1(1), 1–15. doi:10.1007/s40501-014-0009-2
Singh, S. P. (2010). Early intervention in psychosis. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 196(5), 343–345. doi:10.1192/bjp.bp.109.075804
Single case reports now considered as letters to the editor. (1984). American Journal of Psychiatry, 141(7), 852.
Skeat, W. W. (2013). An etymological dictionary of the English language. Mineola, NY: Courier Dover Publications.
Slade, M. (2010). Mental illness and well-being: The central importance of positive psychology and recovery approaches. BMC Health Services Research, 10(26), 1–14.
Slovenko, R. (2011). The DSM in litigation and legislation. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 39(1), 6–11.
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1959). To restore them to their senses. Mental Hospitals, 10(7), 52–53.
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1965). A saboteur who deserves help. Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 17(2). Retrieved from http://www.bonkersinstitute.org/medshow/9saboteur.html
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1975a). Basic tools of primitive psychiatry. Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 26(7), 406–407.
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1975b). The many faces of Stelazine in psychiatry. Hospital & Community Psychiatry, 26(6), 329–330.
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1981a). Some things are hard to improve upon. Like Beethoven’s Fifth... and “Stelazine.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 138(6), A46–A47.
Smith, Kline, & French Laboratories. (1981b). Some things are hard to improve upon. Like Homer’s Iliad... and “Stelazine.” American Journal of Psychiatry, 138(11), A30–A31.
Smulevich, A. B. (1989). Sluggish schizophrenia in the modern classification of mental illness. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 15(4), 533–539. doi:10.1093/schbul/15.4.533
Snezhnevsky, A. V. (1968). The symptomatology, clinical forms and nosology of schizophrenia. In J. G. Howells (Ed.), Modern perspectives in world psychiatry (pp. 425–447). Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Sokal, A. (1996). A physicist experiments with cultural studies. Lingua Franca: The Review of Academic Life, May-June, 62–64.
Solomon, M. (2008). STS and social epistemology of science. In E. J. Hackett, O. Amsterdamska, M. Lynch, & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The handbook of science and technology studies (Third., pp. 241–258). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sonesson, G. (2001). The pencils of nature and culture: New light on Ð and in Ð the Lifeworld. Semiotica, 136(1/4), 27–53.
Sorokin, P., & Merton, R. K. (1937). Social time: A methodological and functional analysis. American Journal of Sociology, 42, 615–629.
Southerland, S. A., Sinatra, G. M., & Matthews, M. R. (2001). Belief, knowledge, and science education. Educational Psychology Review, 13(4), 325–351.
Spanos, N. P., Burgess, C. A., Burgess, M. F., Samuels, C., & Blois, W. O. (1999). Creating false memories of infancy with hypnotic and non-hypnotic procedures. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13(3), 201–218. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-0720(199906)13:3<201::AID-ACP565>3.0.CO;2-X
Spiegel, J. P. (1975). Presidential address: Psychiatry--A high risk profession. American Journal of Psychiatry, 132(7), 693–697.
Spielberg, S. (2002). Minority Report. United States: 20th Century Fox.
Spitzer, M. (1991). Conceptual analysis of psychiatric languages and models of disease. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 4(5), 763–768.
Spitzer, R. L. (2000). A manual for diagnosis and statistics. In The Psychopharmacologists: Interviews (Vol. Vol. III, pp. 415–430). New York: Oxford University Press.
Spitzer, R. L. (2008a). DSM-V: Open and transparent? Psychiatric News, 43(14), 26.
Spitzer, R. L. (2008b, September). Psychiatrists revise diagnostic manual -- In secret. Retrieved from http://internationalpsychoanalysis.net/wp-content/uploads/2008/09/psychiatristsrevisediagnosticmanual.pdf
Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Robins, E. (1978). Research diagnostic criteria: Rationale and reliability. Archives of General Psychiatry, 35(6), 773–782.
Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Gibbon, M., & First, M. B. (1992). The structured clinical interview for DSM-III-R (SCID). Archives of General Psychiatry, 49(8), 624–629.
Spitzer, S. P., & Denzin, N. K. (1968). The mental patient: Studies in the sociology of deviance. New York: McGraw Hill.
Stafford, M. R., Jackson, H., Mayo-Wilson, E., Morrison, A. P., & Kendall, T. (2013). Early interventions to prevent psychosis: Systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ, 346(jan18 1), f185–f185. doi:10.1136/bmj.f185
Ståhle, P. (2009). The dynamics of self-renewal: A systems-thinking to understanding organizational challenges in dynamic environments. In A. Bounfour (Ed.), Organisational capital: Modelling, measuring and contextualising (pp. 119–146). New York: Taylor & Francis.
Stahl, S. M. (2008). Stahl’s essential psychopharmacology: Neuroscientific basis and practical applications. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Staub, M. E. (2011). Madness is civilization: When diagnosis was social, 1948-1980. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Stiegler, B. (2001). Derrida and technology: Fidelity at the limits of deconstruction and the prosthesis of faith. In T. Cohen (Ed.), Jacques Derrida and the humanities: A critical reader (pp. 238–270). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Stone, A. A. (2002). Psychiatrists on the side of angels: The Falun Gong and Soviet Jewry. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 30, 107–11.
Stone, J., LaFrance, W. C., Levenson, J. L., & Sharpe, M. (2010). Issues for DSM-5: Conversion disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(6), 626–627. doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09101440
Stone, J. M., Morrison, P. D., & Pilowsky, L. S. (2007). Review: Glutamate and dopamine dysregulation in schizophrenia—a synthesis and selective review. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 21(4), 440–452.
Strait, L. P. (2011). Rational argumentation and social change in the Frankfurt School tradition. In R. C. Rowland (Ed.), Reasoned argument and social change (pp. 190–197). Washington, DC: National Communication Association.
Strait, L. P. (2012). Epistemic bubbles: A communication theory of collective valuation errors. Presented at the 98th Annual Meeting of the National Communication Association, Orlando, FL: NCA. Retrieved from http://www.lpaulstrait.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/epistemic-bubble-nca-121.pdf
Strait, L. P., & Goodnight, G. T. (2012). The antidepressant-suicide controversy: A study of the scientific rhetoric of risk. Presented at the 98th Annual Meeting of the National Communication Association, Washington, DC. Retrieved from http://www.lpaulstrait.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/11/Strait-Goodnight-2012-Antidepressant-suicide-controversy2.pdf
Strait, L. P., & Goodnight, G. T. (2014). Antidepressants and iatrogenic suicidality: Disturbing arguments in the politics of the supplement. In Disturbing argument: Selected papers from the eighteenth NCA/AFA conference on argumentation. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Stransky, E. (1923). Psychiatrie und philosophie. Monatsschrift Für Psychiatrie Und Neurologie, 53, 251–262.
Strelau, J. (2002). Temperament: A psychological perspective. New York: Kluwar Academic Publishers.
Styazhkin, V. D. (1991). Diagnosis of a paranoic (delusional) personality development in the forensic psychiatric expert examination. Bekhterev Review of Psychiatry and Medical Psychology, 1, 121–126.
Suchman, M. C. (1995). Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 571–610. doi:10.5465/AMR.1995.9508080331
Sweetser, W. (1850). Mental hygiene: Or, an examination of the intellect and passions, designed to show how they affect and are affected by the bodily functions, and their influence on health and longevity. New York: G. P. Putnam.
Swerdlow, N. R., & Koob, G. F. (1987). Dopamine, schizophrenia, mania, and depression: Toward a unified hypothesis of cortico-striato-pallido-thalamic function. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10, 197–245.
Sydenham, T. (1682). Dissertatio epistolaris: De observationibus nuperis circa curationem variolarum confluentium necnon de affectione hysterica. London, England: Kettilby.
Syrjamaki, S. (2011). Sins of a historian: Perspectives to the problem of anachronism. (Dissertation). University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland. Retrieved from https://www.academia.edu/877475/Sins_of_a_Historian._Perspectives_to_the_Problem_of_Anachronism
Szasz, T. S. (1960). The myth of mental illness. American Psychologist, 15, 113–118.
Szasz, T. S. (1973). The second sin. New York: Anchor Press.
Szasz, T. S. (1976). Schizophrenia: The sacred symbol of psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Szenberg, M., & Ramrattan, L. (2004). Reflections of eminent economists. Cheltenham, UK; Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar.
Tanner, J. M. (1978). Foetus into man: Physical growth from conception to maturity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tavris, C. (2013, May 17). How psychiatry went crazy: The “bible” of psychiatric diagnosis shapes--and deforms--both treatment and policy. Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323716304578481222760113886
Taylor, M. A. (1992). Are schizophrenia and affective disorder related? A selective literature review. American Journal of Psychiatry, 149(1), 22–32.
Taylor, M. A. (2013). Hippocrates cried: The decline of American psychiatry. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Tennyson, A. (1875). The works of Alfred Tennyson: In memoriam. London, England: Henry S. King & Co.
Testa, M., & West, S. G. (2010). Civil commitment in the United States. Psychiatry (Edgmont), 7(10), 30–40.
The Amen Clinics. (2012a). ADHD/ADD treatment and therapy. Amen Clinics. Retrieved February 15, 2013, from http://www.amenclinics.com/conditions/adhd-add
The Amen Clinics. (2012b). Attention deficit disorder ADD/ADHD. Amen Clinics. Retrieved February 15, 2013, from http://www.amenclinics.com/index.php/the-science/spect-gallery/item/attention-deficit-disorder-addadhd?category_id=129#add4
The Amen Clinics. (2012c). Bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Amen Clinics. Retrieved February 15, 2013, from http://www.amenclinics.com/index.php/the-science/spect-gallery/item/bipolar-disorder-and-schizophrenia?category_id=129#bipolar
The Amen Clinics. (2013). Anger/severe ODD [oppositional defiant disorder]. Amen Clinics. Retrieved May 1, 2013, from http://www.amenclinics.com/index.php/the-science/spect-gallery/item/angersevere-odd?category_id=146/
The Balance You Need. (2012, August 14). Causes of ADHD. The Balance You Need | Adult ADHD. Retrieved May 1, 2013, from http://thebalanceyouneed.com/health-wellness/children-health/causes-of-adhd/
The Balance You Need. (2013). Dietary recommendations for adult ADHD. The Balance You Need | Adult ADHD. Retrieved February 10, 2013, from http://thebalanceyouneed.com/health-wellness/nutrition/adult-adhd/
Thomas, L. (1995). The medusa and the snail: More notes of a biology watcher. New York: Penguin Books.
Thompson, A., Nelson, B., & Yung, A. (2011). Predictive validity of clinical variables in the “at risk” for psychosis population: International comparison with results from the North American Prodrome Longitudinal Study. Schizophrenia Research, 126(1-3), 51–57. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.09.024
Thornton, D. (2010). Evidence regarding the need for a diagnostic category for a coercive paraphilia. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39(2), 411–418.
Thornton, P. H. (2002). The rise of the corporation in a craft industry: Conflict and conformity in institutional logics. Academy of Management Journal, 45(1), 81–101.
Tillyard, E. M. W. (2011). The Elizabethan world picture. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Todorov, T. (1984). Mikhail Bakhtin: The dialogical principle. (W. Godzich, Trans.). Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Tom Cruise discusses his views on antidepressants and psychiatry. (2005, June 24). Today Show. New York: NBC.
Tomov, T., Voren, R., Keukens, R., & Puras, D. (2007). Mental health policy in former eastern bloc countries. In K. Martin, M. David, M. Elias, & T. Graham (Eds.), Mental health policy and practice across Europe (pp. 397–425). New York: Open University Press.
Toulmin, S. E. (1972). Human understanding: The collective use and evolution of concepts. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Toulmin, S. E. (1990). Cosmopolis: The hidden agenda of modernity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Toulmin, S. E. (2003). The uses of argument. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Toulmin, S. E., & Goodfield, J. (1965). The discovery of time. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Traupman, J. C. (1966). Per?c(u)l-um -i. The Bantam new college Latin & English dictionary. New York: Bantam Books.
Troisi, A., Pasini, A., Bersani, G., Mauro, M. D., & Ciani, N. (1991). Negative symptoms and visual behavior in DSM-III-R prognostic subtypes of schizophreniform disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 83(5), 391–394. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0447.1991.tb05562.x
Turk, J. L. (1993). Rudolf Virchow: Father of cellular pathology. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 86(12), 688–689.
Turner, D. (1983). Marxism and Christianity. Oxford, England: Basil Blackwell.
Tyson, J. B. (2006). Marcion and Luke-Acts: A defining struggle. Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Ulanowicz, R. E. (1986). Growth and development: Ecosystems phenomenology. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Uppendahl, M. (2012, November 7). I am Anne Frank: Part 1. American Horror Story. FX.
Vakili, N., & Gorji, A. (2006). Psychiatry and psychology in medieval Persia. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67, 1862–1869.
Van der Gaag, M., Nieman, D. H., Rietdijk, J., Dragt, S., Ising, H. K., Klaassen, R. M. C., … LIinszen, D. H. (2012). Cognitive behavioral therapy for subjects at ultrahigh risk for developing psychosis: A randomized controlled clinical trial. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 38(6), 1180–1188. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbs105
Van der Hart, O., & Friedman, B. (1989). A reader’s guide to Pierre Janet on dissociation: A neglected intellectual heritage. Dissociation: Progress in the Dissociative Disorders. Retrieved from http://psycnet.apa.org/?fa=main.doiLanding&uid=1991-27611-001
Van der Kolk, B. A., Brown, P., & Van der Hart, O. (1989). Pierre Janet on post-traumatic stress. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 2(4), 365–378.
Van der Kolk, B. A., & Van der Hart, O. (1989). Pierre Janet and the breakdown of adaptation in psychological trauma. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 146(12), 1530.
Van Eemeren, F. H., Grootendorst, R., Johnson, R. H., Plantin, C., & Willard, C. A. (1996). Fundamentals of argumentation theory: A handbook of historical backgrounds and contemporary developments. Mahwah, N.J.: L. Erlbaum.
Van Loon, J. (2002). Risk and technological culture: Towards a sociology of virulence. New York: Routledge.
Van Manen, M. (1990). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action sensitive pedagogy. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Venn, J. (1888). The logic of chance: An essay on the foundations and province of the theory of probability, with especial reference to its logical bearings and its application to moral and social science, and to statistics. London, England: Macmillan.
Vercammen, A., Knegtering, H., den Boer, J. A., Liemburg, E. J., & Aleman, A. (2010). Auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia are associated with reduced functional connectivity of the temporo-parietal area. Biological Psychiatry, 67(10), 912–918.
Vickers, B. (1988). In defence of rhetoric. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Vico, G. B. (1990). On the study methods of our time. (D. P. Verene, Trans.). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Vila, A. C. (1998). Enlightenment and pathology: Sensibility in the literature and medicine of eighteenth-century France. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Villalba, J. de. (1802). Epidemiología Español: Ó historia cronológica de la pestes, contagios, epidemias y epizcotias que han acaecido en España desde la venida de los Cartagineses. Madrid, Spain: La Imprenta de Don Mateo Repullés.
Virchow, R. (1958a). One hundred years of general pathology (1895). In L. J. Rather (Trans.), Disease, life, and man: Selected essays (pp. 170–215). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Virchow, R. (1958b). Standpoints in scientific medicine (1847). In L. J. Rather (Trans.), Disease, life, and man: Selected essays (pp. 26–39). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Voren, R. van. (2010). Political abuse of psychiatry: An historical overview. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(1), 33–35. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp119
Wakefield, J. C. (2011). DSM-5 proposed diagnostic criteria for sexual paraphilias: Tensions between diagnostic validity and forensic utility. International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 34(3), 195–209. doi:10.1016/j.ijlp.2011.04.012
Walker, W. O. (2013). What really happened at the Jerusalem Council? In D. E. Smith & J. B. Tyson (Eds.), Acts and Christian beginnings: The Acts Seminar report (pp. 173–175). Salem, OR: Polebridge Press.
Walsh, J. J. (1913). Asylums and the care for the insane. In The Catholic encyclopedia: An international work of reference on the constitution, doctrine, discipline, and history of the Catholic Church. New York: The Encyclopedia Press. Retrieved from http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08038b.htm
Wardy, R. (1996). The birth of rhetoric: Gorgias, Plato, and their successors. London; New York: Routledge.
Warner, R. (2005). Problems with early and very early intervention in psychosis. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 187(Suppl. 48), s104–s107. doi:10.1192/bjp.187.48.s104
Washington, H. (2011). Flacking for Big Pharma. The American Scholar. Retrieved from http://theamericanscholar.org/flacking-for-big-pharma/
Weaver, R. M. (1948). Ideas have consequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Weaver, R. M. (1970a). The cultural role of rhetoric. In R. L. Johannesen, R. Strickland, & R. T. Eubanks (Eds.), Language is sermonic: Weaver on the nature of rhetoric (pp. 161–186). Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Weaver, R. M. (1970b). The power of the word. In R. L. Johannesen, R. Strickland, & R. T. Eubanks (Eds.), Language is sermonic: Weaver on the nature of rhetoric (pp. 33–56). Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Weaver, R. M. (1970c). Ultimate terms in contemporary rhetoric. In R. L. Johannesen, R. Strickland, & R. T. Eubanks (Eds.), Language is sermonic: Weaver on the nature of rhetoric (pp. 87–114). Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.
Weaver, R. M. (2011). The ethics of rhetoric. Literary Licensing, LLC.
Weber, M. (1949). The methodology of the social sciences. (E. A. Shils & H. A. Finch, Trans.). Glecoe, IL: Free Press.
Weber, M. (1978). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology. (G. Roth & C. Wittich, Eds.). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Wernicke, C. (1906). Grundriss der Psychiatrie in klinischen Vorlesungen. Leipzig, Germany: Thieme.
Wessely, S., Nimnuan, C., & Sharpe, M. (1999). Functional somatic syndromes: One or many? Lancet, 354(9182), 936–939.
Whitely, M. (2011, June 16). Professor McGorry stops advocating for the inclusion of psychosis risk syndrome in DSM5 and restricts support for the use of antipsychotics in non-psychotic patients to experimentation. Speed Up & Sit Still: The Story of ADHD in Australia. Retrieved from http://speedupsitstill.com/australian-16-june-2011
Whitely, M. (2012, February 21). Patrick McGorry deserves praise for about-turn on psychosis risk disorder. Speed Up & Sit Still: The Story of ADHD in Australia. Retrieved from http://speedupsitstill.com/patrick-mcgorry-deserves-praise-about-turn-psychosis-risk-disorder
Whooley, O., & Horwitz, A. V. (2013). The paradox of professional success: Grand ambition, furious resistance, and the derailment of the DSM-5 revision process. In Making the DSM-5: Concepts and controversies (pp. 75–92). New York: Springer.
Wilhelm, J. (1908). General councils. In The Catholic encyclopedia: An international work of reference on the constitution, doctrine, discipline, and history of the Catholic Church. New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved from http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/04423f.htm
Wilkes, J. (2000). Friedrich Nietzsche: Die geschichte seiner krankengeschichte. Psychiatrische Praxis, 27(3), 147–150.
Wilkinson, G. (1986). Political dissent and “sluggish” schizophrenia in the Soviet Union. British Medical Journal, 293(6548), 641–642.
Williams, D. H. (1995). Ambrose of Milan and the end of the Nicene-Arian conflict. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Wilson, H. S., & Skodol, A. (1994). Special report: DSM-IV: Overview and examination of major changes. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 8(6), 340–347. doi:10.1016/0883-9417(94)90002-7
Windholz, G. (1997). The 1950 Joint Scientific Session: Pavlovians as the accusers and the accused. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 33(1), 61–81.
Wing, J. K. (1978). Clinical concepts of schizophrenia. In Schizophrenia: Toward a new synthesis. London, England: Academic Press.
Winter, B. W. (1997). Philo and Paul among the Sophists: Alexandrian and Corinthian responses to a Julio-Claudian movement (2nd ed.). Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.
Wonders and mysteries of animal magnetism displayed; or the history, art, practice, and progress of that useful science, from its first rise in the city of Paris, to the present time. With several curious cases and new anecdotes of the principal professors. (1791). London, England: J. Sudbury.
Woods, S. W., Walsh, B. C., Hawkins, K. A., Miller, T. J., Saksa, J. R., D’Souza, D. C., … Krystal, J. H. (2013). Glycine treatment of the risk syndrome for psychosis: Report of two pilot studies. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 23(8), 931–940. doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.09.008
World Health Organization. (2008). The global burden of disease: 2004 update. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization Press.
Xenophon. (1855). Revenue of the state of Athens. In A. Cooper, Spelman, Smith, & Fielding (Trans.), The whole works of Xenophon (pp. 679–692). New York: Bangs, Brothers, and Company.
Xenophon. (1925). Ways and means. In E. C. Marchant & G. W. Bowersock (Trans.), Constitution of the Athenians. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Yung, A. R., Fusar-Poli, P., & Nelson, B. (2012). The ultra high risk approach to define psychosis risk. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 18(4), 346–350.
Yung, A. R., & McGorry, P. D. (1996a). The initial prodrome in psychosis: Descriptive and qualitative aspects. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 30(5), 587–599.
Yung, A. R., & McGorry, P. D. (1996b). The prodromal phase of first-episode psychosis: Past and current conceptualizations. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 22(2), 353–370.
Yung, A. R., & McGorry, P. D. (1997). Is pre-psychotic intervention realistic in schizophrenia and related disorders? The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 31(6), 799–805.
Yung, A. R., & McGorry, P. D. (2007). Prediction of psychosis: Setting the stage. British Journal of Psychiatry, 191(suppl. 51), s1–s8.
Yung, A. R., McGorry, P. D., McFarlane, C. A., Jackson, H. J., Patton, G. C., & Rakkar, A. (1996). Monitoring and care of young people at incipient risk of psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 22(2), 283–303. doi:10.1093/schbul/22.2.283
Yung, A. R., & Nelson, B. (2011). Young people at ultra high risk for psychosis: Research from the PACE clinic. Revista Brasileira de Psiquiatria, 33(Supl. II), s143–s151.
Yung, A. R., Nelson, B., Thompson, A., & Wood, S. J. (2010). The psychosis threshold in Ultra High Risk (prodromal) research: Is it valid? Schizophrenia Research, 120(1–3), 1–6. doi:10.1016/j.schres.2010.03.014
Yung, A. R., Phillips, L. J., & McGorry, P. D. (2004). Treating schizophrenia in the prodromal phase. London, England: Taylor & Francis.
Yung, A. R., Phillips, L. J., Yuen, H. P., Francey, S. M., McFarlane, C. A., Hallgren, M., & McGorry, P. D. (2003). Psychosis prediction: 12-month follow up of a high-risk (“prodromal”) group. Schizophrenia Research, 60(1), 21–32.
Yung, A. R., Phillips, L. J., Yuen, H. P., & McGorry, P. D. (2004). Risk factors for psychosis in an ultra high-risk group: Psychopathology and clinical features. Schizophrenia Research, 67(2-3), 131–142. doi:10.1016/S0920-9964(03)00192-0
Zander, T. K. (2008). Inventing diagnosis for civil commitment of rapists. Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law, 36(4), 459–469.
Zarefsky, D. (1998). Four senses of rhetorical history. In K. J. Turner (Ed.), Doing rhetorical history: Concepts and cases (pp. 19–32). Tuscaloosa, AL: The University of Alabama Press.
Zeman, A. (2006). What in the world is consciousness? In S. Laureys (Ed.), The boundaries of consciousness: Neurobiology and neuropathology (pp. 1–10). Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier.
Zhong, W., Maradit-Kremers, H., Sauver, J. L. S., Yawn, B. P., Ebbert, J. O., Roger, V. L., … Rocca, W. A. (2013). Age and sex patterns of drug prescribing in a defined American population. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 88(7), 697–707. doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2013.04.021
Zilboorg, G. (1941). Ambulatory schizophrenias. Psychiatry, 4, 149–155.
Zisook, S., Corruble, E., Duan, N., Iglewicz, A., Karam, E. G., Lanuoette, N., … Seay, K. (2012). The bereavement exclusion and DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 29(5), 425–443.
Žižek, S. (1994). The spectre of ideology. In S. Žižek (Ed.), Mapping ideology (pp. 1–33). London, England: Verso.
1 “?? ?? ?? ???? ?????? ?????? ??? ????????? ????? ????????, ???????? ?? ??? ?? ?????? ?????? ??????? ????????, ?????? ????? ?? ??? ? ??????? ??? ??? ??? ?????????? ? ??? ???????????? ????????.”
2 Phillip Elias (2010, para. 1).
3 Richard Weaver (1970c, p. 92).
4 Hamlet, Act 2, Scene 2 (Shakespeare, 1904, p. 48).
5 'Nosology' is derived from the Greek words nósos (?????), meaning 'disease' or 'sickness,' and lógos (?????) meaning 'word.'  Nosology thus denotes 'words about disease,' and more specifically refers to the study of the classification of diseases (Brock, 2002).
6 The first four editions of the DSM are distinguished by Roman numerals (e.g., DSM-IV).  In a move somewhat reminiscent of Catholic Church's decision to abandon the exclusive use of Latin in its liturgical celebrations in order “to adapt more suitably to the needs of our own times those institutions which are subject to change” (Paul VI, 1963, sec. 1), the APA eschewed Roman numerals for DSM-5, offering the scarcely credible explanation that “in the 21st century, when technology allows immediate electronic dissemination of information worldwide, Roman numerals are especially limiting” (American Psychiatric Association, 2010c).  This decision should be understood in light of the criticisms—in which the fifth edition is almost always referred to as 'DSM-V,' incidentally—proffered by individuals closely associated with the development of DSM-III and DSM-IV.  This is supported by the timing of the decision: The APA referred to the revision as 'DSM-V' for more than eight years, choosing to change the name after significant criticism from the former editors appeared.  Though minor, the change supports the position that the older editions contain a nosology that is limiting, especially given recent scientific and technological developments.
7 This controversy has been ignored entirely by argumentation scholars, despite its status as “the most interesting debate in the West until the struggle between Stalin and Trotsky,” according to no less an authority than Michel Vovelle (as cited in Rubenstein, 1999, p. xii).
8 The quoted text is from a letter preserved by the historian Eusebius, whom modern historians frequently judge to be unreliable; e.g., Burckhardt (1983) famously called him “the first thoroughly dishonest historian of antiquity” (p. 283).  Caveat lector.
9 I am excluding the most likely non-historical 'Council of Jerusalem' described in chapter 15 of the Acts of the Apostles and, most likely, in the second chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Galatians.  Even if the council were an historical event about which we have meaningful knowledge, it would have taken place long before the emergence of the monarchical episcopate, and certainly would not have involved temporal authorities (Walker, 2013).  Before the Edict of Milan provided Christianity with official legal recognition in 313, there were other pre-ecumenical councils, but they were all more or less provincial in scope, and no reliable records of their written acts were preserved (Wilhelm, 1908).  Their significance to the Church as a whole was roughly analogous to the significance of DSM-I and DSM-II to the global institution of psychiatry.  Prior to DSM III, according to Robert Spitzer, many psychiatrists “hadn't the slightest interest in the DSM,” and some prominent psychiatrists had not even heard of it (R. L. Spitzer, 2000, p. 423).  The sporadic anachronistic references to the DSM in movies and television shows set before 1980, often uttered by non-psychiatrist characters, reflect the widespread tendency in our culture to read the present into the past (Syrjamaki, 2011).  For example, in the second season of the television show American Horror Story, set in 1964, four years before DSM-II was published, a lesbian journalist says to a psychiatrist: “According to your bible, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, I'm sick” (Uppendahl, 2012).  Not only was DSM-I not regarded as a 'bible' by anyone, the suggestion that a non-psychiatrist with no special interest in mental health in 1964 would have heard of it, let alone that idiom, is risible.
10 The intensity of the conflict between the Homoousian Trinitarians and Homoiousian heretics suggests that 'one iota of difference' can be significant.
11 “????? ??? ?? ???? ??? ????? ??? ???????? ??????????? ?? ????????? ?? ??????? ?? ????????? ?? ??????? ?? ??? ??????? ???????? ?? ???? ????????? ???????????? ?? ?? ??????? ???? ?????????????. ??? ???? ??? ?????? ????????? ? ?? ??? ???? ???????? ??? ????????? ????????????? ??? ???? ????????? ????? ????? ?????? ? ?????? ???????????? ??? ? ???? ??????????. ?? ??? ?? ??????? ?????????? ?????? ??????? ? ?? ?? ??? ????? ??? ???? ????? ?????????. ??? ???? ?? ??? ?? ????? ????? ????????? ???????? ? ??????? ? ?? ???????? ????? ?????????? ? ??? ???????? ??? ????????? ???????????.”
12 Kenneth Burke argued that all metaphysics is in fact “coy theology” (1966, p. 45).  Though Durkheim (2001) never deals with the subject of theology in his study of religion, it seems to me to imply that theology could be reframed as 'coy sociology.'
13 His answer betrays the state of field's worldly innocence at the time: “I said to him, 'Well, is there any money involved?' and he said, 'No, there's no money.'  So I had to make a quick decision and I made the right choice – not to worry about the money” (p. 416).
14   “La guerre! C'est une chose trop grave pour la confier à des militaires” (as cited in Constable, 2004, p. 79).
15 This so-called 'bereavement exclusion' (BE) was very controversially eliminated in DSM-5. Critics argued that it is “normal” for people grieving the death of a loved one to exhibit the symptoms of depression (Gutting, 2013, para. 4).  Supporters of the change countered that a help-seeking individual should not be denied treatment simply because their symptoms can be explained as an expression of grief.  Further, they argued that most studies in the past 30 years have shown that depressive syndromes in the context of bereavement are not fundamentally different from depressive syndromes after other major losses — or from depression appearing “out of the blue.” ...DSM-5 rightly recognizes that grief does not immunize the bereaved person against the ravages of major depression—a potentially lethal yet highly treatable disorder (Pies, 2013, para. 3, 16).  
Importantly, supporters contend that there is a significant difference between bereavement that looks like a major depressive episode (MDE) and other (perhaps more 'normal') exhibitions of grief:   
MDE and grief are fundamentally different constructs.  The former is a medical condition that is life threatening and often requires treatment; the latter is thought to be an adaptive, instinctual response to loss that generally does not require treatment.  Although bereaved individuals may feel terribly sad and like “a piece of themselves” is missing, most do not experience MDE.  But just as in the context of any number of other serious life adversities, some bereaved individuals do experience MDE.  When that happens, the individual may simultaneously experience grief and MDE. But acknowledging that bereavement can be a severe stressor that may trigger an MDE in a vulnerable person does NOT medicalize or pathologize grief!  (Zisook et al., 2012, p. 441)
Notice the capitalization of the word 'not' and the exclamation point at the end—this is fairly emphatic prose for its genre (a review article in a refereed scientific journal).  I tend to agree with the change: Would the same critics of the BE oppose a diagnosis of post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) for rape victims if they believed that the symptoms of PTSD were 'normal' for someone who has gone through such a traumatic experience?  In any event, removing the BE furthers the basic project started in DSM-III to eliminate etiological concerns from the manual.  
16 Freud explained that this is why he remained so preoccupied with “sexual processes,” which he believed provided that organic foundation, and was “rather annoyed with Bleuler for his willingness to accept a psychology without sexuality” (p. 68).
17 Darrel Regier also claimed that it would just take too much time to deal with every public response, many of which would undoubtedly be trivial or premised upon a misunderstanding.  Spitzer found this argument scarcely credible: “Making the DSM-V process transparent by posting the minutes on a public web site, as the WHO does for the ICD-11 revision groups, does not obligate the APA to respond to 'every spontaneous response.'  How much time does it take to ignore a crackpot blog posting?” (R. L. Spitzer, 2008b, p. 2).
18 I have eschewed the all-too-common practice of including a separate chapter or extensive prologue on 'methodology,' which usually functions as “something of a ritual, an invocation to the presiding deities of scientific method, serving to ensure an appropriately 'scientific' status for what follows, and avowing the proper concern with meeting standards of scientific acceptability” (Kaplan, 1964, p. 20).  I burn no incense at the altar of methodology, which “is no more the precondition of fruitful intellectual work than the knowledge of anatomy is the precondition for correct walking” (Weber, 1949, p. 115).  In my judgment, what sometimes goes under the name of 'methodological rigor' is, in fact, intellectual laziness.
19 “...???? ????? ????? ????? ???? ?????????? ???? ?? ?????? ????? ?????, ???? ???? ???????? ????? ???? ?????, ???? ???? ?? ????? ??? ????, ???????? ???????? ??? ?? ??? ??????????” (Plato, 1997c, sec. 264c).
20 “...sed accidit eis, perinde ac si quis e diversis locis manus, pedes, caput aliaque membra optime quidem, sed non unius corporis comparatione depicta sumeret, nullatenus invicem sibi respondentibus, ut monstrum potius quam homo ex illis componeretur”  (Copernicus, 1873, p. 5, ln. 18-23, my translation).
21 Richard McKeon (1987, p. 24).
22 Samuel Bowden wrote 'A poem on the new method of treating physic' in praise of Thomas Morgan's (1725) treatise on the Philosophical principles of medicine (quoted in W. P. Jones, 1966, p. 125, emphasis in original).
23 In his non-extant treatise ‘On the Non-Existent,’ Gorgias advances three claims: nothing exists; even if something does exist, it cannot be known; and even if something can be known, it cannot be communicated.  Instead, the only kind of knowledge possible is that of belief and opinion.  To support the claim that nothing exists, Gorgias first argues that if something exists, it would have mass and take up space.  Further, it must be either one thing or many things.  If it has mass and takes up space, it must be divisible, and yet if it is divisible it cannot be one.  But if nothing unitary exists, then certainly no combination of unitary things can exist.  Therefore, nothing can exist.  Gorgias supports his second claim by noting that it is possible to have thoughts about fictional objects.  If we may also have thoughts about non-fictional objects—that is, knowledge about objective reality—there must be some way to distinguish those thoughts from those concerning the non-existent.  Our only manner of distinguishing thoughts is through thought itself—we think that some thoughts are true while others are not.  Yet we have no way of verifying if those distinguishing thoughts are themselves true; in other words, we have no objective external criterion against which the veracity our thoughts may be confirmed.  Since objective knowledge (as opposed to belief) must be both true and known to be true, it is impossible. For his third claim, Gorgias argues that if one can acquire knowledge about the objective world, it is by means of the senses.  If knowledge can be acquired by means of communication, then our ability to understand communication is like all of our other senses. Yet we cannot see tone, or hear color—likewise, speech, which uses symbols as a code to refer to various things, can refer to an experience, but it cannot transmit it (Guthrie, 1969, p. 195).
24 Besides authoring one dialogue against (the Gorgias) and one in favor (the Phaedrus) of rhetoric, there are other textual complexities that make interpreting Plato difficult.  For example, in the Gorgias, Socrates gives speeches detailing his defense of dialectic and critique of rhetoric, and is dialectically cross-examined by his rhetorical opponents.
25 This tripartite division reflects an early awareness of the three categories of faculty psychology (ethos-volition; logos-cognition; pathos-affect) that were later identified by Thomas Reid in the Scottish Enlightenment.  Their contribution to contemporary psychiatric nosology is discussed in Chapter 3.
26 I must note, however, that it is not a symbolic form on the order of Cassirer's.  
27 See, for example, (Matthew, 2008).
28 A proposal to reintroduce melancholia to DSM-5 failed for reasons having little to do with science, as discussed in Chapter 4.
29 “??? ??? ??? ??? ??? ???? ??? ???.”
30 “To refer to a rhetorical 'place' is to mean, simply, that there are some locations in the field of thought where verbal controversy can occur through the instrumentalities of rhetoric, and other locations where the mode of discourse must be of some character other than rhetorical or where, as Wittgenstein has advised, one would incur an obligation to be silent” (Black, 1992, p. 52).
31 “Il n'y a pas de hors-texte.”
32 Needless to say, this is an example of one of my favorite tropes, proslepsis.  I should also mention at this point that the word 'system' comes from the Greek word sýst?ma (???????), literally 'standing together,' generally used to denote a composite structure or apparatus (Liddell & Scott, 1940).  
33 He goes on to discuss—in a single paragraph that makes passing references to the Arian crisis, the humoral model of pathology, and Freud—a variety of different ways this paradox manifests in the realm of ideas: “The same structure is present in the corresponding Greek word, hypostasis, literally, a standing under: hence anything set under, such as a stand, base, bottom, prop, support, stay; hence metaphorically, that which lies at the bottom of a thing, as the groundwork, subject-matter, argument of a narrative, speech, poem; a starting point, a beginning.  In ecclesiastical Greek, the word corresponds to the Latin Persona, a person of the Trinity (which leads us back into the old argument between the homoousians and the homoiousians, as to whether the three persons were of the same or similar substance).  Medically, the word can designate a suppression, as of humours that ought to come to the surface... When we are examining, from the standpoint of the Symbolic, metaphysical tracts that would deal with 'fundamentals' and get to the 'bottom' of things, this last set of meanings can admonish us to be on the look-out for what Freud might call 'cloacal' motives, furtively interwoven with speculations that may on the surface seem wholly abstract.  An 'acceptance' of the universe on this plane may also be a roundabout way of 'making peace with the faeces'” (p. 23, emphasis in original).
34 Tom Cruise, interviewed by Matt Lauer on NBC’s ‘Today Show’ (“Tom Cruise discusses his views on antidepressants and psychiatry,” 2005, para. 14).
35 Miriam Siegler & Humphry Osmond (1974, p. 1).
36 According to Greek mythology, Hera sent Argos Panoptes (a primordial giant with 100 eyes) to watch over the cow-nymph Io in order to guard against any illicit encounters with Zeus (E. Hamilton, 1940).
37 Friedrich Nietzsche (1986, sec. II:223, emphasis in the original).
38 Vladimir Nabokov (1973, p. 66).
39 Originally, semiotics was a field of medical knowledge concerned with the interpretation of clinical signs, only later acquiring its more generalized identity as the study of signification and meaning-making (Baer, 1988).
40 Galen goes on to clarify that it “makes no difference if one uses the term ‘diseased’ instead of ‘morbid.’ The term ‘knowledge’ is to be understood in its common, not its technical, sense” (2004, p. 1).
41 The various writings attributed to Hippocrates are not all believed to have been authored by him, but rather by subsequent students (King, 1993).  Citations of Hippocrates in this chapter should be understood as citations of the Hippocratic corpus, rather than necessarily as direct attributions to the historical Hippocrates.
42 In DSM-IV, this is a difference between the second and first axes (respectively) of disorders.
43 This also helps to explain how a powerful eighteenth to twentieth century American social movement thoroughly united in opposition to mixed beverages could perhaps paradoxically come to be known as the ‘Temperance Movement.’
44 The word for nature is physis (?????), emphasizing that the basis of disease is physiological, not supernatural.
45 Aristotle, a virtual contemporary of Hippocrates, suggested that the mind was located in the heart and that the only purpose of the brain was to keep the body from overheating by cooling the blood (Klein & Thorne, 2006).
46 An unfortunate counterpoint to this line of reasoning, which became evident during the so-called ‘witch craze’ in Europe (spanning the fourteenth to seventeenth centuries), is that if a disease does not respond to medical treatment, that might be evidence that the patient is a victim of witchcraft (Barstow, 1995; R. Porter, 1991).
47 Nixon’s ‘Vietnamization’ speech, for example, deploys this strategy to great effect, although his creative reading of the historical record was not appreciated by all critics (K. K. Campbell, 1972; Hill, 1972).
48 Disclaimer: This should not be read as legal advice.
49 Unlike the laundry list of potentially dangerous chemicals—including sugar—that could be the cause of their child’s ADHD, parents are comforted with the incredibly spurious suggestion that “[all] of these products are safe for children since they are all made from plant sources” (The Balance You Need, 2013).  
50 The outmoded idea that the therapeutic effect of amphetamine in ADHD is “paradoxical” was first suggested by Bradley (1937).
51 Homeopathy is based on the doctrine proposed by Samuel Hahnemann (1833) that 'like cures like’ – essentially, the theory posits that a substance known to cause a particular symptom can heal that same symptom once it is so severely diluted that not even one molecule of the original substance remains.
52 I say this without necessarily agreeing with Kuhn's idea of how that transition takes place (i.e., revolutionary paradigm shift).  See the discussion in the previous chapter on Toulmin's criticism of Kuhn's hypothesis, a criticism which I argue finds considerable support in this study.
53 That is, I am not attempting to be completely faithful to Husserl (1970) in my usage here.
54 My aim with this Keynesian subtext is simultaneously to explain and demonstrate (there is an inverse relationship between my success and the degree to which this explanation is necessary) an epistemic process Burke called “verbal ‘atom cracking.’ That is, a word belongs by custom to a certain category—and by rational planning you wrench it loose and metaphorically apply it to a different category” (Burke, 1984a, p. 308).
55 Avicenna was also one of the rare few scholars during the medieval period who recognized that both consciousness and behavior are products of organic processes in the brain, and that some somatic symptoms may have psychological explanations (Preul, 1997; Vakili & Gorji, 2006).
56 The new treatment’s effectiveness relative to the then current standard of care was sufficiently impressive that its advocates were able to overcome widespread anti-Catholic persecutory delusions that quinine was the first phase of some “Popish plot” against the Protestant nations (Rocco, 2004, p. 103).
57 Having worked out a synthesis of Galenic medicine and the Stoic theory of signs, Avicenna proceeded “to schematize a conditional with multiple antecedents and a common consequent: ‘If this man has a chronic fever, hard cough, labored breathing, shooting pains, and rasping pulse, he has pleurisy.’ Here Avicenna lays a groundwork for the idea of a syndrome as he pioneers in the diagnosis of a specific disease” (Goodman, 2003, p. 155).
58 The term ‘epidemiology’ first appeared a little more than a century later in Joaquín de Villalba’s (1802) Epidemilogía Española.
59 “Il y a déja plus d'un siécle que les vapeurs sont endémiques dans les grandes Villes; la plupart des femmes qui jouissent des commodités de la vie sont vaporeuses, on peut dire qu'elles achetent par un suite de langueurs l'agrément des richesses” (Raulin, 1758, p. viii).
60 Not just their nerves, as the vapors usually brought on impotency in these effete men (Vila, 1998).
61 “Les hommes deviennent vaporeux tout comme les femmes lorsque leurs nerfs perdent leur fermeté naturelle; il arrive quelquefois qu'ils sont foibles par une suite du temperament, mais ils le deviennent le plus souvent par la débauche, par l'épuisement, par l'oisiveté, par la contention d'esprit, etc.” (Raulin, 1758, p. 42).
62 “On a peu de bons livres sur les maladies vaporeuses… La raison en est simple, c'est que ces maladies sont nouvelles; leurs progres ont suivi coeur du luxe, ceux de l'immense population de Paris” (Beauchêne, 1783, pp. 8–9).
63 “La mélancolie n'est pas précisément une maladie nouvelle, mais dans aucun siècle n'avoit été aussi général, & n'avoit eu autant d'intensité; de maniere qu'on peut la regarder comme un fléau nouveau: il faut donc réunir tous les efforts pour l'anéantir, comme on le fait avec succès pour les affections vénériennes” (Bressy, 1789, pp. ii–iii).
64 Nevertheless, as we have already seen, the ‘wandering womb’ hypothesis persisted in one form or another through the twentieth century, and directly led to the invention of the vibrator, which began as a device used by physicians to administer so-called ‘medical massage’ (designed to induce ‘hysterical paroxysm,’ a euphemism for orgasm), a standard treatment for hysteria and several eating disorders still common as late as the 1920s (Maines, 2001).
65 “Ces malades étaient exactement les mêmes que ceux qui se présentaient aux consultations du temps de Charcot. En réalité, les malades n'ont pas changé depuis Charcot, ce sont les mots pour les désigner qui ont changé” (Guillain, 1949, p. 147).  The claim is certainly not absolutely true; patients can and do change, sometimes even because of changes in the words used to describe them.  Obviously bored wealthy housewives no longer need fainting couches to make it through the day.
66 The final name of this disorder was “still under active discussion” as of the time that the APA made the draft revisions unavailable in anticipation of the imminent publication of the new edition (American Psychiatric Association, 2011b).  In the final draft, as an apparent compromise, the disorder was named “Conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 318).  According to the explanation of the disorder's diagnostic features: “Many clinicians use the alternative names of 'functional' (referring to abnormal central nervous system function) or 'psychogenic' (referring to an assumed etiology) to describe the symptoms of conversion disorder (functional neurological symptom disorder)” (p. 319).  It is unclear why the authors believe that the suggestion that the disorder is caused by “abnormal central nervous system function” is less “etiological” than the suggestion that the disorder is “psychogenic.”
67 The positions of Descartes and Freud on this matter are discussed in greater detail below.
68 The authors also suggest that the name ‘functional neurological disorder’ would constitute a “return to an older terminology” (p. 626).  As evidence for this claim, they cite Wessely, Nimnuan, and Sharpe (1999), who indeed use this terminology, which, they contend, is a better way to discuss the symptoms of conversion disorder and other somatoform disorders.  Given the context, the referent for the comparative word ‘older’ is very unclear.
69 The biggest difference between Sydenham’s clinical picture and those represented in DSM-IV and ICD-10 is that Sydenham also included hypochondriasis and melancholia as clinical forms of the hysterical syndrome (Dewhurst, 1966).
70 Antonio Valsalva, a physician and anatomist from Bologna whose research predominately focused on the ear, is known today for inventing the ‘Valsalva maneuver’ whereby with a closed mouth and a pinched nose one attempts to exhale in order to equalize the pressure between the ears and sinuses, a technique commonly performed today by divers and airplane passengers.
71 It was not yet known that cells could be quite deviant without actually presenting any medical problem, as can often be the case with some benign tumors.
72 It must be noted however that Descartes contributed significantly to the modern understanding of neuroanatomy, including particularly his suggestion that the soul was materially connected to the body via the pineal gland, and his assumption that the organization and material structure of the nervous system, which mediated the connection between the intentions of the will and the behavior of the body, reflected established habits of behavior (LeDoux, 2003; G. Murphy, 1956).  His neuroanatomical instincts were incorrect, for the most part, but the very fact that he conceived of the problem in these terms was highly significant.
73 Inversely, Pussin also followed in Pinel’s footsteps by joining him at Salpêtrière a few years later as his special assistant.  Pussin’s interest in treating asylum inmates began not in medical school—he was not a physician, but a tanner by trade—but rather during his own experience as patient at Bicêtre suffering from scrofula (lymphadenopathy of the neck related to tuberculosis).  After his recovery, he took a staff position at Bicêtre in 1771, and 13 years later he became superintendent of the mental ward, despite his lack of medical education.  His social status perhaps explains why he was insufficiently credited for his role in the founding of psychiatry.  Despite Pinel’s explicit crediting of Pussin in the 1809 second edition of his Treatise on Insanity, his contemporaries insisted on crediting Pinel for Pussin’s initiative.  Various etchings and a painting in 1876 by Tony Robert-Fleury, in which Pinel was depicted as “singlehandedly unchaining the mentally ill,” almost certainly helped to promote this myth (Noll, 2007, p. 56).  Subsequent historians have for the most part passed on the error without correction.  Michel Foucault in Madness & Civilization notes (with some irony) that “Pinel, according to tradition, had ‘liberated’ the insane of Bicêtre” (2001, p. 240), and David Healy reports that “Philippe Pinel, one of the first physicians to work in a lunatic asylum, unlocked the chains binding the lunatics in the Bicêtre” (2004b, p. 10).  In fact, in 1797, two years after Pinel left Bicêtre, Pussin instituted a reform that permanently banned the use of chains as restraints, and three years later, once Pussin had joined Pinel at Salpêtrière, a similar reform was instituted (Gerard, 1997; Pinel, 2008).
74 Selective publication of positive results is still a major problem for private sector pharmaceutical research (Goldacre, 2013; Healy, 2000b, 2004a; Washington, 2011).
75 “Il est difficile de s'entendre en médecine si on n'attache un sens précis au mot expérience, puisque chacun vante les résultats de la sienne propre, et qu'il cite plus ou moins de faits en sa faveur. Une expérience, pour être authentique et concluante, et servir de fondement solide à une méthode quelconque de traitement, doit être faite sur un grand nombrr de malades, asservia à des règles générales et dirigés suivant un ordre déterminé. Elle doit être aussi  établie sur une succession régulière d'observations constatées avec un soin extrêmè et répétées pendant un certain nombre d'années avec une sorte de conformité. Enfin elle doit rapporter également les événemens favorables comme ceux qui sont contraires, assigner leurs nombres respectifs, et instruire autant par les uns que par les autres. C'est assez dire qu'elle doit être fondée sur la théorie des probabilités déjà si heureusement appliquée à plusieurs objets de la vie civile, et sur laquelle doivent désormais porter les méthodes de traitment des maladies, si on veut les établir sur un fondement solide” (Pinel, 1807, pp. 169–170).
76 The link between Linneaus and psychiatric nosology is also apparent in the work of  François Boissier de Sauvages de Lacroix, a botanist and physician who created the first nosological framework for disease by synthesizing the work of Sydenham and Linneaus in his three-volume magnum opus, Nosologia Methodica, published in 1763, which incorporated much of the substantive content from his 1731 Treatise de Nouvelles Classes de Maladies, a work that focused on madness.  His approach to madness strongly influenced Pinel’s thinking, and more broadly, his Nosologia “was used as an orderly classification for decades, if not centuries, to come” (Millon & Simonsen, 2010, p. 25).
77 Many sources incorrectly claim that Baron Ernst Maria Johann Karl Freiherr von Feuchtersleben (1845) first introduced the term ‘psychosis.’
78 Kraepelin’s ‘clinical forms’ include ‘dementia praecox simplex,’ ‘hebephrenia, ‘depressive dementia praecox (simple and delusional form),’ ‘circular dementia praecox,’ ‘agitated dementia praecox,’ ‘periodic dementia praecox,’ ‘catatonia, paranoid dementia (mild and severe form),’ and ‘schizophasia (confusional speech dementia praecox)’ (Kraepelin, 1896).
79 Syndrome will indeed return, as we shall see shortly, but in a revised form that incorporates the ideas of course and prognosis.
80 This approach was particularly associated with Theodor Meynert (1890) and Carl Wernicke (1906), who attempted to build an over-all system of organic and mechanistic psychiatry. But they often supplemented their objective findings with hypotheses on the anatomical and physiologic substratum of psychic activity… [formulating] psychopathological disturbances in terms borrowed from brain anatomy” (Ellenberger, 1970, p. 284).
81 Contrast this with what came to be known in the 1970s as the neo-Kraepelinian model, which “disregards etiology and dismisses conflicting theoretical standpoints… The neo-Kraepelinians do not disregard etiology as much as history, whether personal or social.  They would most likely be satisfied with some form of genetic and biochemical etiology, which is in fact what they aim for.  The neo-Kraepelinians simply do not want to deal with any form of social etiology” (P. Brown, 1990).
82 The ubiquity of the 'clinical picture' metaphor in medical literature also testifies to the emphasis on the visual in diagnosis.
83 Despite the conceptual richness of this model, Stransky later adopted an atheoretical perspective that would later still come to be associated with neo-Kraepelinianism: “…the mere fact that I have to work through the pompous, arrogant, and puffy language of most mediocre philosophers [publishing in psychiatric journals]… causes considerable, almost physical discomfort in me… Every totally mindless brain cobbler or spine cutter does more research work than recent philosophers all taken together” (cited by M. Spitzer, 1991, p. 763; Stransky, 1923, pp. 251–252, 259).
84 As a representative example, Jablensky suggests that “Eugen Bleuler… modified Kraepelin’s original concept by adding to the scope of dementia praecox clinical illnesses that did not evolve into a ‘terminal state’ of deterioration” (Jablensky, 2011, p. 4).
85 This misunderstanding is particularly understandable in light of Bleuler’s explanation that “[it] is not alone in hysteria that one finds an arrangement of different personalities one succeeding the other; through similar mechanisms schizophrenia produces different personalities existing side by side” (Bleuler, 1924, p. 134, emphasis in the original German). this passage has sometimes been construed to claim that Bleuler included multiple personality disorder within his broader concept of schizophrenia (Rosenbaum, 1980), Bleuler’s italicization suggests this is a misreading, an argument made most persuasively by Ian Hacking (1998) in a rather scathing criticism of Rosenbaum’s interpretation of Bleuler’s work.
86 After his final mental break in 1889, Friedrich Nietzsche became Ziehen’s most famous patient at the Jena psychiatric hospital (Wilkes, 2000).
87 Psychasthenia, the disease entity Janet is most known for establishing, is to neurasthenia as Freud’s psychoneurosis is to actual neurosis (Janet & Raymond, 1903).  Ellenberger (1970) argues that Bleuler’s schizophrenia is more or less a “transposition” of Janet’s psychasthenia (p. 406). Moskowitz & Heim (2011) argue for an even closer affinity, noting parallel key terms (e.g., ‘lowering,’ ‘leveling,’ ‘weakening,’ and ‘synthesis’) and the features of inherited premorbid susceptibility and  mental weakness resulting in the destruction of an individual’s ability to restrain and order the more primitive and chaotic elements of the psyche.
88 This dissociative strategy is by no means unique to science, or even to the modern world. St. Paul employed it in his conflict with James, Peter, and the Jerusalem church, concerning Jewish dietary law and circumcision:
I want you to know, brothers and sisters, that the gospel I preached is not of human origin.  I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it; rather, I received it by revelation from Jesus Christ.  For you have heard of my previous way of life... I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people and was extremely zealous for the traditions of my fathers.  But when God... was pleased to reveal his Son in me so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, my immediate response was not to consult any human being.  I did not go up to Jerusalem to see those who were apostles before I was, but I went into Arabia... I assure you before God that what I am writing you is no lie. (Galatians 1:11-20, New International Version)  
Paul establishes ethos by referring to his knowledge of the traditions which he now rejects, and by emphasizing the novelty of his teaching, insisting, rather vehemently, that he did not consult anyone who actually met Jesus for years.  This break with the past was so radical that it inspired one of Paul's second-century followers, Marcion of Sinope, to proclaim that the god of the Torah is an evil demiurge, and Jesus (and his one and only apostle, Paul) revealed the existence of a god who had previously been completely unknown.  This in turn, according to Tyson (2006), led second-century proto-orthodox Christians to author the Acts of the Apostles, which explicitly contradicts Paul's claims in his Epistle to the Galatians, quoted here (see, for example, Acts 9:1-31).  This example illustrates the wide range of the rhetorical topics of historical continuity, and the discontinuity of ingenium.
89 Unfortunately, a different side-effect led to clozapine's quick withdrawal from the market in 1975, when eight patients being treated with clozapine in Finland died from agranulocytosis, a condition in which one's immune system becomes severely compromised (Kendall, 2011). Clozapine was eventually reintroduced in 1989 in light of its reported effectiveness in 'atypical' cases of schizophrenia in which the symptoms were “treatment-resistant” (Kane, Honigfeld, Singer, & Meltzer, 1988, p. 789).  The emergence of 'treatment resistance' as a diagnostic category is a clear example of the tendency, under the regime of pharmaceutical reason, whereby “[illness] comes gradually to be defined in terms of that to which it 'responds'” (Lakoff, 2005, p. 7).
90 This problem is hardly unique to psychiatry.  No pharmaceutical treatment for acute heart failure developed over the last two decades has decreased mortality (Jauhar, 2014).
91 These hypotheses, which I have dramatically oversimplified, are interestingly enough in part the products of extreme substance abuse. The recognition that overactivity in the mesolimbic dopaminergic pathway plays a role in psychosis came after observing the psychosis associated with very large doses of stimulant drugs (e.g., cocaine, methamphetamine) and certain treatments for Parkinson’s disease (e.g., L-DOPA), both of which facilitate the transmission of dopamine in the central nervous system. This discovery led to the elucidation of the pharmacological mechanism of chlorpromazine and the other neuroleptic drugs (namely, antagonism of the D2 family of dopamine receptors). Neuroleptics, especially the newer ‘atypical’ class that began with clozapine, also antagonize 5-HT2A (a subtype of serotonin) receptors, through which the effects of Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin (the active hallucinogenic ingredient in so-called ‘magic mushrooms’ are mediated. Likewise, observations of the psychotic states associated with phencyclidine (PCP), a drug that blocks the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NDMA) glutamate receptors, led to the glutamate hypothesis of schizophrenia.
92 These issues will be discussed further in the next chapter in the context of psychosis risk syndrome.
93 In a very heated reply, Richard Kluft argues: “While Dr. Noll accuses me of promoting the colonization of the supernatural, an alternative explanation might be that I have studied the literatures of anthropology and the history of psychiatry to appreciate the wisdom of understanding DID [Dissociative Identity Disorder] as a secularized expression of possession syndromes...  What Dr. Noll excoriates may be understood, alternatively, as a cross-cultural sensitivity increasingly embraced by our profession” (Kluft, 2014, p. 4).  In the same reply, Kluft makes use of apophasis to respond to what he perceived as personal attacks: “In my response I will not counter-attack Dr. Noll for his egregious and regrettable ad hominem remarks.  Here I will simply state my aversion to attacks against individuals, and my conviction that they distract from rather than enhance one's argument (p. 3).
94 Frances also explains here that his vocal opposition to DSM-5 was partly motivated by guilt about his failure to use his position as Chair of the DSM-IV Task Force to oppose the satanic ritual abuse false epidemic.
95 Dr. Iris Hineman is the (fictional) lead researcher of the ‘PreCrime’ technology in the film Minority Report (Spielberg, 2002).
96 As relayed by Flavius Philostratos (1809, pp. 434, 450).
97 Friedrich Nietzsche (1986, sec. II:363).
98 John Spiegel, discussing the role of risk in psychiatry as a field of practice in his presidential address at the 128th annual meeting of the American Psychiatric Association (Spiegel, 1975, p. 697, emphasis in original).
99 Though it has been re-branded 'attenuated psychosis syndrome' in DSM-5 (Table 1), that name is rather uncommon in the scientific literature and popular press, owing to its recent creation.  A plurality of the literature refers to the diagnosis as 'psychosis risk syndrome,' including official sources during the DSM-5 early development phase.  Consequently, I (except when noted) stick to 'psychosis risk syndrome' when referring to the diagnosis.  The other neames that are used in the literature to describe this proposed diagnostic category include 'at risk mental state,' 'risk syndrome for psychosis,' 'ultra high risk state,' and the 'prodromal phase' of schizophrenia.
100 [467b] S: ???????? ?? ?? ????. G: ????? ????. ???????? ??, ? ????????, ?? ??????? ?????????, ??? ?? ?? ?????? ?????, ???? ??????? ?????? ??????????? ??????? ??? ??? ????? ????? ???????? ?????????. S: ?????, ?? ? ? ???, ??????. ???? ?? ?????? ??? ??? ?????????????? ?? ?? ???? ???????????; G: ???????. S: ?? ? ?; ?? ??? ????????????, ??? ?? ? ???????? ??????? ????????????; G: ????? ??. [467c] S: ???? ??????? ???? ????????? ??? ??? ????? ???????? ??????? ? ?? ?? ???? ??? ??????? ?????? ???? ?????? ?????????? ?????????;
101 [114c] ???? ?????? ?? ????? ??? ?? ????????????, ? ??????, ??? ?????? ???? ?????? ??? ????????? ?? ?? ??? ?????????: ????? ??? ?? ????? ??? ? ????? ??????. [114d] ?? ??? ??? ????? ?????????????? ????? ????? ?? ??? ?????????, ?? ?????? ???? ?????? ?????: ??? ?????? ? ????? ????? ? ??????? ???? ???? ??? ????? ???? ??? ??? ????????, ??????? ???????? ?? ? ???? ???????? ????, ????? ??? ??????? ??? ????? ??? ????? ??????????? ??????? ????? ?????—????? ??? ? ????????—??? ??? ?? ??????? ????? ??????? ?????, ??? ?? ????? ??? ????? ?????? ??? ?????... [115a] ????? ??? ???, ???, ? ?????? ?? ??? ????? ??? ?? ?????, ??? ????? ?? ???? ????? ??????? ??????????: ??? ?? ??? ??? ?????, ???? ?? ???? ????????, ? ?????????, ??? ?????? ?? ??? ??? ????????? ???? ?? ???????: ????? ??? ?? ??????? ????? ?????????? ????? ?? ???????? ??? ?? ???????? ???? ??????? ???????? ?????? ??????.
102 The word ????????? is notoriously difficult to translate. Plato (1997a) wrote an entire dialogue in which Socrates and Plato's uncle Charmides (one of the notorious Thirty Tyrants) attempt to figure out the exact meaning of the word. Socrates in the end suggests something closer to 'self-knowledge' or 'self-possession' than to 'moderation' or 'temperance,' but the issue is never fully resolved.  It was one of the four cardinal Greek virtues, along with prudence (phron?sis, ????????), righteousness (dikaiosun?, ??????????), and piety (eusebia, ????????—the root seb- refers to a frightful danger, because the original sense of piety was fear of the gods), all of which were important topics of rhetoric during the Second Sophistic (Winter, 1997).  
103 In this passage I have replaced the transliterated Greek words in parentheses back to their original form, in a few cases correcting errors in the rendering of the word (e.g., doxan for doxa, technas for techne, etc.) in the (otherwise acceptable) translated text.
104 ????????? is the third person singular indicative active voice of ????????, which means ‘to destroy/ruin/lose utterly.’
105 An alternate translation of this sentence reads: “This consideration chiefly has discouraged the adventurers from trying so dangerous an experiment” (Xenophon, 1855, p. 687).
106 ???????????? is the middle voice aorist participle of ??????, which in the active voice infinitive means ‘to make common’ or ‘to communicate.’  In the middle voice, it means ‘to communicate one to another,’ ‘to put into communication with one another,’ or, when paired with a noun in the accusative case as in this passage, ‘to take part or share in.’ This is the only extant instance of ???????????? that I could find in the Perseus digital database of classical texts (Crane & Department of the Classics, Tufts University, 2013).  
107 [27] ??? ??? ??????????? ?? ????? ????? ?????? ??? ? ????????. ?? ?????? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ????? ?????? ??????? ?? ???? ??????????????? ?????? ????????? ? ?? ???? ???????? ????. [28] ?? ????, ???? ?? ???, ?? ??? ???, ????? ?????????, ?????? ?????????????; ??? ?????????? ??? ??? ????? ?? ???? ?? ???????: ?????? ??? ????? ???????????????: ???????? ?? ????? ?? ?????????????: [29] ? ??? ??? ????? ?????? ???????? ???????? ????????, ? ?? ?? ????? ????? ????????? ??? ?? ????????. ??? ?????? ??? ??? ???????? ?? ???? ??? ????????? ?? ??? ?????. [30] ??? ?????? ????? ??? ???? ??? ???? ?????? ???????????? ?? ?? ??????????? ????????????. ???? ??? ??? ????? ???????? ???? ?????: ?? ?? ? ????? ???? ?????? ????? ??? ?????????, ?? ?? ???????????? ??? ????? ????????????, ????? ??, ?? ??? ?????, [31] ?????? ?? ????????? ???????????, ?? ?? ??? ? ????? ? ???????? ? ?? ???????? ???????, ????? ??? ??? ????????????? ?? ?? ???? ????? ????????. ?? ?? ??? ????? ????????? ?????? ??? ????????????? ??????. [32] ???? ?? ?? ????? ??? ??????? ????????????? ??? ???????????? ??? ????? ???????????? ???????????. ???? ?????? ????? ????????, ?? ? ?? ???????? ???? ???????????????? ??????????? ???? ??????? ? ?? ??????? ?? ????????:
108 Using a bizarrely misogynistic metaphor, Machiavelli argues that instead of facing the goddess of fortune with caution, one should rape her (because that's how women want to be treated): “I certainly think that it is better to be impetuous than cautious, for fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, if you wish to master her, to conquer her by force; and it can be seen that she lets herself be overcome by these rather than by those who proceed coldly. And therefore, like a woman, she is a friend to the young, because they are less cautious, fiercer, and master her with greater audacity” (p. 102).
109 Though quite possibly apocryphal, there is an often cited exchange between Pierre-Simon Laplace and Napoleon in which the latter asked about the Laplace's failure to mention God in his most recent book on astronomy.  Laplace had no more need for God than he did for chance, and accordingly is said to have bluntly replied: “Je n'avais pas besoin de cette hypothèse-là” (“I had no need for that hypothesis there”).  Napoleon, rather amused by this line, relayed it to the Italian astronomer Joseph-Louis Lagrange, who replied “Ah! c'est une belle hypothèse; ça explique beaucoup de choses!” (“Ah! [But] it is a beautiful hypothesis that explains so many things!”) (Ball, 1888, p. 388).  The same could be said, perhaps, for chance in the physical sciences and for risk in the social sciences.
110Traité des dégénérescences physiques, intellectuelles, et morales de l'espèce humaine: Et des causes qui produisent ces variétés maladives.
111 “...dans bien des cas, la funeste terminaison de la folie héréditaire.  Une immobilisation soudaine de toutes les facultés, une démence précoce, indiquent que le jeune sujet a atteint le terme de la vie intellectuelle dont il peut disposer.  Il est alors désigné sous le nom d'imbécile, d'idiot.  Ces tristes représentants des dégénérescences dans l'humanité forment la quatrième classe de nos folies héréditaires.”
112 Bellak goes on to comment that he does “not mean to question the existence or validity of 'salon schizophrenics.'  Rather, I wish to determine the difference between them and those people who were always more or less vegetative.  (Undoubtedly, many originally brilliant schizophrenics may reach a terminal stage of deterioration resembling the patients who always manifested an extremely low level of functioning)” (p. 63).
113 Another term used in some jurisdictions is 'sexually dangerous person.'
114 SVPs almost always are male.  Even though a survey of victims by the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that females were responsible for 6% of sexual assaults committed by individuals and involved in 40% of sexual assaults committed by groups, they represent less than .02% of offenders given the SVP classification (D’Orazio, Arkowitz, Adams, & Maram, 2009).
115 More specifically, children developmentally in Tanner Stage 2 and Tanner Stage 3, generally aged 11-14 (Tanner, 1978).
116 His critics would have no problem answering this rhetorical question with an emphatic 'no.'
117 Ray Blanchard was a member of the DSM-5 Sexual and Gender Identity Disorders Work Group and chair of the Paraphilias Subworkgroup, and while the Board of Trustees of the APA voted not to accept the Subworkgroup's recommendations in favor of adopting Blanchard's view of hebephilia, he did succeed in his efforts to change the definition of a paraphilia adopted in the final manuscript so that it contrasts with what is 'phenotypically normal.'  The approach in DSM-IV defined paraphilia by concatenation, enumerating a variety of paraphilic fantasies, urges, or behaviors; in contrast, the DSM-5 approach, which had been strongly advocated by Blanchard, defines paraphilia by exclusion, i.e., in terms of what it is not (Blanchard, 2009a).
118 In these kinds of criticisms, it is almost a pro forma requirement to make a pun in which the production of the DSM is a display of madness.
119 By pre-pharmacological, I am referring to the time before modern pharmacological treatments, i.e., (major and minor) tranquilizers, mood stabilizers, and anti-depressants.  The discovery of an effective treatment for acute psychosis in chlorpromazine (Thorazine) fundamentally changed psychiatry, but certainly did not introduce the use of pharmaceutical treatments in psychiatry (Healy, 2004b).  In the late nineteenth century, alienists made extensive use of sedatives, including camphor, chloroform, chloral hydrate, ether, hemlock, hyoscine, hyoscyamine, hypnal (which could refer to a wide variety of substances, most often phenazone), marijuana, morphine, paraldehyde, and potassium bromide (and other bromide salts, the hypnotic properties of which provide the basis for the metaphor of bromide as verbal sedative), along with many more, detailed in Daniel Tuke’s (1892) Dictionary of Psychological Medicine (Reynolds, 1894; Ringer & Sainsbury, 1892).  As Noll observed, the “pharmacological treatment of insanity was not an innovation of the late twentieth century by any means” (2011, p. 32).
120 Freud uses this phrase in his explanation of the “phenomenon that it is precisely communities with adjoining territories, and related to each other in other ways as well, who are engaged in constant feuds and in ridiculing each other” (p. 72).
121 Schizoaffective disorder is similar to schizophrenia except that the psychotic symptoms are very often (though occasionally not) accompanied by the symptoms of a mood disorder.  If the psychotic symptoms are always accompanied by the symptoms of an affective disorder, then the proper diagnosis is either 'depressive disorder with psychotic features' or 'bipolar disorder with psychotic features' (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, pp. 105–110).  The meaningfulness of such distinctions has been questioned, but is generally upheld (Maier et al., 1992, 1993; Taylor, 1992).
122 Though not sufficient to make two-way predictions with any reasonable degree of confidence, it is apparent that the absence of symptoms from the negative axis, as well as good eye contact when being interviewed, are “good prognostic features” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 97; Troisi, Pasini, Bersani, Mauro, & Ciani, 1991).
123 I say 'not precisely' because it is accurate to say that this research has been in progress for the past 15 years, but it is inaccurate to imply that these efforts began only 15 years ago; the true number is more than double that.  Interestingly, at nearly every period of time going back to the mid 1950s, when researchers indicated the length of time research into some form of psychosis risk had been going on, the length invariably was between 15 and 20 years.  I can only speculate as to the causes of this observed trend.
124 ?? ????? ???? ???? ???????? ?????????? ???? ????? ? ???????, ??? ?? ?????????? ?????????? ????? ?????, ????? ???????? ????? ????????: ???? ????? ???? ?? ???? ?? ??? ????? ??? ???????? ?? ?? ????? ????? ????????...
125 John 1:7-8.  It is also worth noting that the eleventh century monk Psellos ('the stammerer') called rhetoric the pródromos of philosophical conversion (Kaldellis, 1999).
126 The world's top selling medicine in 2010 was a statin, branded 'Lipitor,' which provided Pfizer with $13.3 billion in revenue that year (R. Cooper, 2011).
127 William P. Jones (1966, p. 228).
128 Jacques Derrida (1974, p. 144, emphasis in original).
129 David Healy, interviewed by Christopher Lane (2009).
130 Alfred Tennyson, In Memoriam, V, (1875, p. 17).
131 As it turns out, there are both chemical and electrical synapses (Freberg, 2006).
132 The period is given different names by various theorists: as ‘advanced liberalism’ (N. S. Rose, 1999), 'reflexive modernity’ (Beck, Giddens, & Lash, 1994), and 'second modernity’ (Beck, 1992b).
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

xiv

ii

 284

